Mowgli’s Brothers

     Now Rann the Kite brings home the night
        That Mang the Bat sets free--
     The herds are shut in byre and hut
        For loosed till dawn are we.
     This is the hour of pride and power,
        Talon and tush and claw.
     Oh, hear the call!--Good hunting all
        That keep the Jungle Law!
     Night-Song in the Jungle

It was seven o’clock of a very warm evening in the Seeonee hills when
Father Wolf woke up from his day’s rest, scratched himself, yawned, and
spread out his paws one after the other to get rid of the sleepy feeling
in their tips. Mother Wolf lay with her big gray nose dropped across her
four tumbling, squealing cubs, and the moon shone into the mouth of the
cave where they all lived. “Augrh!” said Father Wolf. “It is time to
hunt again.” He was going to spring down hill when a little shadow with
a bushy tail crossed the threshold and whined: “Good luck go with you, O
Chief of the Wolves. And good luck and strong white teeth go with noble
children that they may never forget the hungry in this world.”

It was the jackal--Tabaqui, the Dish-licker--and the wolves of India
despise Tabaqui because he runs about making mischief, and telling
tales, and eating rags and pieces of leather from the village
rubbish-heaps. But they are afraid of him too, because Tabaqui, more
than anyone else in the jungle, is apt to go mad, and then he forgets
that he was ever afraid of anyone, and runs through the forest biting
everything in his way. Even the tiger runs and hides when little Tabaqui
goes mad, for madness is the most disgraceful thing that can overtake
a wild creature. We call it hydrophobia, but they call it dewanee--the
madness--and run.

“Enter, then, and look,” said Father Wolf stiffly, “but there is no food
here.”

“For a wolf, no,” said Tabaqui, “but for so mean a person as myself a
dry bone is a good feast. Who are we, the Gidur-log [the jackal people],
to pick and choose?” He scuttled to the back of the cave, where he
found the bone of a buck with some meat on it, and sat cracking the end
merrily.

“All thanks for this good meal,” he said, licking his lips. “How
beautiful are the noble children! How large are their eyes! And so young
too! Indeed, indeed, I might have remembered that the children of kings
are men from the beginning.”

Now, Tabaqui knew as well as anyone else that there is nothing so
unlucky as to compliment children to their faces. It pleased him to see
Mother and Father Wolf look uncomfortable.

Tabaqui sat still, rejoicing in the mischief that he had made, and then
he said spitefully:

“Shere Khan, the Big One, has shifted his hunting grounds. He will hunt
among these hills for the next moon, so he has told me.”

Shere Khan was the tiger who lived near the Waingunga River, twenty
miles away.

“He has no right!” Father Wolf began angrily--“By the Law of the Jungle
he has no right to change his quarters without due warning. He will
frighten every head of game within ten miles, and I--I have to kill for
two, these days.”

“His mother did not call him Lungri [the Lame One] for nothing,” said
Mother Wolf quietly. “He has been lame in one foot from his birth. That
is why he has only killed cattle. Now the villagers of the Waingunga are
angry with him, and he has come here to make our villagers angry.
They will scour the jungle for him when he is far away, and we and our
children must run when the grass is set alight. Indeed, we are very
grateful to Shere Khan!”

“Shall I tell him of your gratitude?” said Tabaqui.

“Out!” snapped Father Wolf. “Out and hunt with thy master. Thou hast
done harm enough for one night.”

“I go,” said Tabaqui quietly. “Ye can hear Shere Khan below in the
thickets. I might have saved myself the message.”

Father Wolf listened, and below in the valley that ran down to a little
river he heard the dry, angry, snarly, singsong whine of a tiger who has
caught nothing and does not care if all the jungle knows it.

“The fool!” said Father Wolf. “To begin a night’s work with that noise!
Does he think that our buck are like his fat Waingunga bullocks?”

“H’sh. It is neither bullock nor buck he hunts to-night,” said Mother
Wolf. “It is Man.”

The whine had changed to a sort of humming purr that seemed to come
from every quarter of the compass. It was the noise that bewilders
woodcutters and gypsies sleeping in the open, and makes them run
sometimes into the very mouth of the tiger.

“Man!” said Father Wolf, showing all his white teeth. “Faugh! Are there
not enough beetles and frogs in the tanks that he must eat Man, and on
our ground too!”

The Law of the Jungle, which never orders anything without a reason,
forbids every beast to eat Man except when he is killing to show his
children how to kill, and then he must hunt outside the hunting grounds
of his pack or tribe. The real reason for this is that man-killing
means, sooner or later, the arrival of white men on elephants, with
guns, and hundreds of brown men with gongs and rockets and torches.
Then everybody in the jungle suffers. The reason the beasts give among
themselves is that Man is the weakest and most defenseless of all living
things, and it is unsportsmanlike to touch him. They say too--and it is
true--that man-eaters become mangy, and lose their teeth.

The purr grew louder, and ended in the full-throated “Aaarh!” of the
tiger’s charge.

Then there was a howl--an untigerish howl--from Shere Khan. “He has
missed,” said Mother Wolf. “What is it?”

Father Wolf ran out a few paces and heard Shere Khan muttering and
mumbling savagely as he tumbled about in the scrub.

“The fool has had no more sense than to jump at a woodcutter’s campfire,
and has burned his feet,” said Father Wolf with a grunt. “Tabaqui is
with him.”

“Something is coming uphill,” said Mother Wolf, twitching one ear. “Get
ready.”

The bushes rustled a little in the thicket, and Father Wolf dropped
with his haunches under him, ready for his leap. Then, if you had been
watching, you would have seen the most wonderful thing in the world--the
wolf checked in mid-spring. He made his bound before he saw what it was
he was jumping at, and then he tried to stop himself. The result was
that he shot up straight into the air for four or five feet, landing
almost where he left ground.

“Man!” he snapped. “A man’s cub. Look!”

Directly in front of him, holding on by a low branch, stood a naked
brown baby who could just walk--as soft and as dimpled a little atom
as ever came to a wolf’s cave at night. He looked up into Father Wolf’s
face, and laughed.

“Is that a man’s cub?” said Mother Wolf. “I have never seen one. Bring
it here.”

A Wolf accustomed to moving his own cubs can, if necessary, mouth an egg
without breaking it, and though Father Wolf’s jaws closed right on the
child’s back not a tooth even scratched the skin as he laid it down
among the cubs.

“How little! How naked, and--how bold!” said Mother Wolf softly. The
baby was pushing his way between the cubs to get close to the warm hide.
“Ahai! He is taking his meal with the others. And so this is a man’s
cub. Now, was there ever a wolf that could boast of a man’s cub among
her children?”

“I have heard now and again of such a thing, but never in our Pack or in
my time,” said Father Wolf. “He is altogether without hair, and I
could kill him with a touch of my foot. But see, he looks up and is not
afraid.”

The moonlight was blocked out of the mouth of the cave, for Shere Khan’s
great square head and shoulders were thrust into the entrance. Tabaqui,
behind him, was squeaking: “My lord, my lord, it went in here!”

“Shere Khan does us great honor,” said Father Wolf, but his eyes were
very angry. “What does Shere Khan need?”

“My quarry. A man’s cub went this way,” said Shere Khan. “Its parents
have run off. Give it to me.”

Shere Khan had jumped at a woodcutter’s campfire, as Father Wolf had
said, and was furious from the pain of his burned feet. But Father Wolf
knew that the mouth of the cave was too narrow for a tiger to come in
by. Even where he was, Shere Khan’s shoulders and forepaws were cramped
for want of room, as a man’s would be if he tried to fight in a barrel.

“The Wolves are a free people,” said Father Wolf. “They take orders from
the Head of the Pack, and not from any striped cattle-killer. The man’s
cub is ours--to kill if we choose.”

“Ye choose and ye do not choose! What talk is this of choosing? By the
bull that I killed, am I to stand nosing into your dog’s den for my fair
dues? It is I, Shere Khan, who speak!”

The tiger’s roar filled the cave with thunder. Mother Wolf shook herself
clear of the cubs and sprang forward, her eyes, like two green moons in
the darkness, facing the blazing eyes of Shere Khan.

“And it is I, Raksha [The Demon], who answers. The man’s cub is mine,
Lungri--mine to me! He shall not be killed. He shall live to run with
the Pack and to hunt with the Pack; and in the end, look you, hunter of
little naked cubs--frog-eater--fish-killer--he shall hunt thee! Now get
hence, or by the Sambhur that I killed (I eat no starved cattle), back
thou goest to thy mother, burned beast of the jungle, lamer than ever
thou camest into the world! Go!”

Father Wolf looked on amazed. He had almost forgotten the days when he
won Mother Wolf in fair fight from five other wolves, when she ran in
the Pack and was not called The Demon for compliment’s sake. Shere Khan
might have faced Father Wolf, but he could not stand up against Mother
Wolf, for he knew that where he was she had all the advantage of the
ground, and would fight to the death. So he backed out of the cave mouth
growling, and when he was clear he shouted:

“Each dog barks in his own yard! We will see what the Pack will say to
this fostering of man-cubs. The cub is mine, and to my teeth he will
come in the end, O bush-tailed thieves!”

Mother Wolf threw herself down panting among the cubs, and Father Wolf
said to her gravely:

“Shere Khan speaks this much truth. The cub must be shown to the Pack.
Wilt thou still keep him, Mother?”

“Keep him!” she gasped. “He came naked, by night, alone and very hungry;
yet he was not afraid! Look, he has pushed one of my babes to one side
already. And that lame butcher would have killed him and would have run
off to the Waingunga while the villagers here hunted through all our
lairs in revenge! Keep him? Assuredly I will keep him. Lie still, little
frog. O thou Mowgli--for Mowgli the Frog I will call thee--the time will
come when thou wilt hunt Shere Khan as he has hunted thee.”

“But what will our Pack say?” said Father Wolf.

The Law of the Jungle lays down very clearly that any wolf may, when he
marries, withdraw from the Pack he belongs to. But as soon as his cubs
are old enough to stand on their feet he must bring them to the Pack
Council, which is generally held once a month at full moon, in order
that the other wolves may identify them. After that inspection the cubs
are free to run where they please, and until they have killed their
first buck no excuse is accepted if a grown wolf of the Pack kills one
of them. The punishment is death where the murderer can be found; and if
you think for a minute you will see that this must be so.

Father Wolf waited till his cubs could run a little, and then on the
night of the Pack Meeting took them and Mowgli and Mother Wolf to the
Council Rock--a hilltop covered with stones and boulders where a hundred
wolves could hide. Akela, the great gray Lone Wolf, who led all the Pack
by strength and cunning, lay out at full length on his rock, and
below him sat forty or more wolves of every size and color, from
badger-colored veterans who could handle a buck alone to young black
three-year-olds who thought they could. The Lone Wolf had led them for a
year now. He had fallen twice into a wolf trap in his youth, and once he
had been beaten and left for dead; so he knew the manners and customs
of men. There was very little talking at the Rock. The cubs tumbled over
each other in the center of the circle where their mothers and fathers
sat, and now and again a senior wolf would go quietly up to a cub, look
at him carefully, and return to his place on noiseless feet. Sometimes a
mother would push her cub far out into the moonlight to be sure that
he had not been overlooked. Akela from his rock would cry: “Ye know
the Law--ye know the Law. Look well, O Wolves!” And the anxious mothers
would take up the call: “Look--look well, O Wolves!”

At last--and Mother Wolf’s neck bristles lifted as the time came--Father
Wolf pushed “Mowgli the Frog,” as they called him, into the center,
where he sat laughing and playing with some pebbles that glistened in
the moonlight.

Akela never raised his head from his paws, but went on with the
monotonous cry: “Look well!” A muffled roar came up from behind the
rocks--the voice of Shere Khan crying: “The cub is mine. Give him to
me. What have the Free People to do with a man’s cub?” Akela never even
twitched his ears. All he said was: “Look well, O Wolves! What have
the Free People to do with the orders of any save the Free People? Look
well!”

There was a chorus of deep growls, and a young wolf in his fourth year
flung back Shere Khan’s question to Akela: “What have the Free People to
do with a man’s cub?” Now, the Law of the Jungle lays down that if there
is any dispute as to the right of a cub to be accepted by the Pack, he
must be spoken for by at least two members of the Pack who are not his
father and mother.

“Who speaks for this cub?” said Akela. “Among the Free People who
speaks?” There was no answer and Mother Wolf got ready for what she knew
would be her last fight, if things came to fighting.

Then the only other creature who is allowed at the Pack Council--Baloo,
the sleepy brown bear who teaches the wolf cubs the Law of the Jungle:
old Baloo, who can come and go where he pleases because he eats only
nuts and roots and honey--rose upon his hind quarters and grunted.

“The man’s cub--the man’s cub?” he said. “I speak for the man’s cub.
There is no harm in a man’s cub. I have no gift of words, but I speak
the truth. Let him run with the Pack, and be entered with the others. I
myself will teach him.”

“We need yet another,” said Akela. “Baloo has spoken, and he is our
teacher for the young cubs. Who speaks besides Baloo?”

A black shadow dropped down into the circle. It was Bagheera the Black
Panther, inky black all over, but with the panther markings showing
up in certain lights like the pattern of watered silk. Everybody knew
Bagheera, and nobody cared to cross his path; for he was as cunning as
Tabaqui, as bold as the wild buffalo, and as reckless as the wounded
elephant. But he had a voice as soft as wild honey dripping from a tree,
and a skin softer than down.

“O Akela, and ye the Free People,” he purred, “I have no right in your
assembly, but the Law of the Jungle says that if there is a doubt which
is not a killing matter in regard to a new cub, the life of that cub may
be bought at a price. And the Law does not say who may or may not pay
that price. Am I right?”

“Good! Good!” said the young wolves, who are always hungry. “Listen to
Bagheera. The cub can be bought for a price. It is the Law.”

“Knowing that I have no right to speak here, I ask your leave.”

“Speak then,” cried twenty voices.

“To kill a naked cub is shame. Besides, he may make better sport for you
when he is grown. Baloo has spoken in his behalf. Now to Baloo’s word
I will add one bull, and a fat one, newly killed, not half a mile
from here, if ye will accept the man’s cub according to the Law. Is it
difficult?”

There was a clamor of scores of voices, saying: “What matter? He will
die in the winter rains. He will scorch in the sun. What harm can
a naked frog do us? Let him run with the Pack. Where is the bull,
Bagheera? Let him be accepted.” And then came Akela’s deep bay, crying:
“Look well--look well, O Wolves!”

Mowgli was still deeply interested in the pebbles, and he did not notice
when the wolves came and looked at him one by one. At last they all went
down the hill for the dead bull, and only Akela, Bagheera, Baloo, and
Mowgli’s own wolves were left. Shere Khan roared still in the night, for
he was very angry that Mowgli had not been handed over to him.

“Ay, roar well,” said Bagheera, under his whiskers, “for the time will
come when this naked thing will make thee roar to another tune, or I
know nothing of man.”

“It was well done,” said Akela. “Men and their cubs are very wise. He
may be a help in time.”

“Truly, a help in time of need; for none can hope to lead the Pack
forever,” said Bagheera.

Akela said nothing. He was thinking of the time that comes to every
leader of every pack when his strength goes from him and he gets feebler
and feebler, till at last he is killed by the wolves and a new leader
comes up--to be killed in his turn.

“Take him away,” he said to Father Wolf, “and train him as befits one of
the Free People.”

And that is how Mowgli was entered into the Seeonee Wolf Pack for the
price of a bull and on Baloo’s good word.

Now you must be content to skip ten or eleven whole years, and only
guess at all the wonderful life that Mowgli led among the wolves,
because if it were written out it would fill ever so many books. He
grew up with the cubs, though they, of course, were grown wolves almost
before he was a child. And Father Wolf taught him his business, and the
meaning of things in the jungle, till every rustle in the grass, every
breath of the warm night air, every note of the owls above his head,
every scratch of a bat’s claws as it roosted for a while in a tree, and
every splash of every little fish jumping in a pool meant just as much
to him as the work of his office means to a business man. When he was
not learning he sat out in the sun and slept, and ate and went to sleep
again. When he felt dirty or hot he swam in the forest pools; and
when he wanted honey (Baloo told him that honey and nuts were just as
pleasant to eat as raw meat) he climbed up for it, and that Bagheera
showed him how to do. Bagheera would lie out on a branch and call, “Come
along, Little Brother,” and at first Mowgli would cling like the sloth,
but afterward he would fling himself through the branches almost as
boldly as the gray ape. He took his place at the Council Rock, too,
when the Pack met, and there he discovered that if he stared hard at any
wolf, the wolf would be forced to drop his eyes, and so he used to stare
for fun. At other times he would pick the long thorns out of the pads
of his friends, for wolves suffer terribly from thorns and burs in their
coats. He would go down the hillside into the cultivated lands by night,
and look very curiously at the villagers in their huts, but he had a
mistrust of men because Bagheera showed him a square box with a drop
gate so cunningly hidden in the jungle that he nearly walked into it,
and told him that it was a trap. He loved better than anything else to
go with Bagheera into the dark warm heart of the forest, to sleep all
through the drowsy day, and at night see how Bagheera did his
killing. Bagheera killed right and left as he felt hungry, and so did
Mowgli--with one exception. As soon as he was old enough to understand
things, Bagheera told him that he must never touch cattle because he had
been bought into the Pack at the price of a bull’s life. “All the jungle
is thine,” said Bagheera, “and thou canst kill everything that thou art
strong enough to kill; but for the sake of the bull that bought thee
thou must never kill or eat any cattle young or old. That is the Law of
the Jungle.” Mowgli obeyed faithfully.

And he grew and grew strong as a boy must grow who does not know that
he is learning any lessons, and who has nothing in the world to think of
except things to eat.

Mother Wolf told him once or twice that Shere Khan was not a creature
to be trusted, and that some day he must kill Shere Khan. But though a
young wolf would have remembered that advice every hour, Mowgli forgot
it because he was only a boy--though he would have called himself a wolf
if he had been able to speak in any human tongue.

Shere Khan was always crossing his path in the jungle, for as Akela grew
older and feebler the lame tiger had come to be great friends with the
younger wolves of the Pack, who followed him for scraps, a thing Akela
would never have allowed if he had dared to push his authority to the
proper bounds. Then Shere Khan would flatter them and wonder that such
fine young hunters were content to be led by a dying wolf and a man’s
cub. “They tell me,” Shere Khan would say, “that at Council ye dare
not look him between the eyes.” And the young wolves would growl and
bristle.

Bagheera, who had eyes and ears everywhere, knew something of this, and
once or twice he told Mowgli in so many words that Shere Khan would kill
him some day. Mowgli would laugh and answer: “I have the Pack and I have
thee; and Baloo, though he is so lazy, might strike a blow or two for my
sake. Why should I be afraid?”

It was one very warm day that a new notion came to Bagheera--born of
something that he had heard. Perhaps Ikki the Porcupine had told him;
but he said to Mowgli when they were deep in the jungle, as the boy lay
with his head on Bagheera’s beautiful black skin, “Little Brother, how
often have I told thee that Shere Khan is thy enemy?”

“As many times as there are nuts on that palm,” said Mowgli, who,
naturally, could not count. “What of it? I am sleepy, Bagheera, and
Shere Khan is all long tail and loud talk--like Mao, the Peacock.”

“But this is no time for sleeping. Baloo knows it; I know it; the Pack
know it; and even the foolish, foolish deer know. Tabaqui has told thee
too.”

“Ho! ho!” said Mowgli. “Tabaqui came to me not long ago with some rude
talk that I was a naked man’s cub and not fit to dig pig-nuts. But I
caught Tabaqui by the tail and swung him twice against a palm-tree to
teach him better manners.”

“That was foolishness, for though Tabaqui is a mischief-maker, he would
have told thee of something that concerned thee closely. Open those
eyes, Little Brother. Shere Khan dare not kill thee in the jungle. But
remember, Akela is very old, and soon the day comes when he cannot kill
his buck, and then he will be leader no more. Many of the wolves that
looked thee over when thou wast brought to the Council first are old
too, and the young wolves believe, as Shere Khan has taught them, that
a man-cub has no place with the Pack. In a little time thou wilt be a
man.”

“And what is a man that he should not run with his brothers?” said
Mowgli. “I was born in the jungle. I have obeyed the Law of the Jungle,
and there is no wolf of ours from whose paws I have not pulled a thorn.
Surely they are my brothers!”

Bagheera stretched himself at full length and half shut his eyes.
“Little Brother,” said he, “feel under my jaw.”

Mowgli put up his strong brown hand, and just under Bagheera’s silky
chin, where the giant rolling muscles were all hid by the glossy hair,
he came upon a little bald spot.

“There is no one in the jungle that knows that I, Bagheera, carry that
mark--the mark of the collar; and yet, Little Brother, I was born among
men, and it was among men that my mother died--in the cages of the
king’s palace at Oodeypore. It was because of this that I paid the price
for thee at the Council when thou wast a little naked cub. Yes, I too
was born among men. I had never seen the jungle. They fed me behind
bars from an iron pan till one night I felt that I was Bagheera--the
Panther--and no man’s plaything, and I broke the silly lock with one
blow of my paw and came away. And because I had learned the ways of men,
I became more terrible in the jungle than Shere Khan. Is it not so?”

“Yes,” said Mowgli, “all the jungle fear Bagheera--all except Mowgli.”

“Oh, thou art a man’s cub,” said the Black Panther very tenderly. “And
even as I returned to my jungle, so thou must go back to men at last--to
the men who are thy brothers--if thou art not killed in the Council.”

“But why--but why should any wish to kill me?” said Mowgli.

“Look at me,” said Bagheera. And Mowgli looked at him steadily between
the eyes. The big panther turned his head away in half a minute.

“That is why,” he said, shifting his paw on the leaves. “Not even I can
look thee between the eyes, and I was born among men, and I love thee,
Little Brother. The others they hate thee because their eyes cannot meet
thine; because thou art wise; because thou hast pulled out thorns from
their feet--because thou art a man.”

“I did not know these things,” said Mowgli sullenly, and he frowned
under his heavy black eyebrows.

“What is the Law of the Jungle? Strike first and then give tongue. By
thy very carelessness they know that thou art a man. But be wise. It is
in my heart that when Akela misses his next kill--and at each hunt
it costs him more to pin the buck--the Pack will turn against him and
against thee. They will hold a jungle Council at the Rock, and then--and
then--I have it!” said Bagheera, leaping up. “Go thou down quickly to
the men’s huts in the valley, and take some of the Red Flower which they
grow there, so that when the time comes thou mayest have even a stronger
friend than I or Baloo or those of the Pack that love thee. Get the Red
Flower.”

By Red Flower Bagheera meant fire, only no creature in the jungle will
call fire by its proper name. Every beast lives in deadly fear of it,
and invents a hundred ways of describing it.

“The Red Flower?” said Mowgli. “That grows outside their huts in the
twilight. I will get some.”

“There speaks the man’s cub,” said Bagheera proudly. “Remember that it
grows in little pots. Get one swiftly, and keep it by thee for time of
need.”

“Good!” said Mowgli. “I go. But art thou sure, O my Bagheera”--he
slipped his arm around the splendid neck and looked deep into the big
eyes--“art thou sure that all this is Shere Khan’s doing?”

“By the Broken Lock that freed me, I am sure, Little Brother.”

“Then, by the Bull that bought me, I will pay Shere Khan full tale for
this, and it may be a little over,” said Mowgli, and he bounded away.

“That is a man. That is all a man,” said Bagheera to himself, lying down
again. “Oh, Shere Khan, never was a blacker hunting than that frog-hunt
of thine ten years ago!”

Mowgli was far and far through the forest, running hard, and his heart
was hot in him. He came to the cave as the evening mist rose, and drew
breath, and looked down the valley. The cubs were out, but Mother
Wolf, at the back of the cave, knew by his breathing that something was
troubling her frog.

“What is it, Son?” she said.

“Some bat’s chatter of Shere Khan,” he called back. “I hunt among the
plowed fields tonight,” and he plunged downward through the bushes, to
the stream at the bottom of the valley. There he checked, for he heard
the yell of the Pack hunting, heard the bellow of a hunted Sambhur,
and the snort as the buck turned at bay. Then there were wicked, bitter
howls from the young wolves: “Akela! Akela! Let the Lone Wolf show his
strength. Room for the leader of the Pack! Spring, Akela!”

The Lone Wolf must have sprung and missed his hold, for Mowgli heard the
snap of his teeth and then a yelp as the Sambhur knocked him over with
his forefoot.

He did not wait for anything more, but dashed on; and the yells grew
fainter behind him as he ran into the croplands where the villagers
lived.

“Bagheera spoke truth,” he panted, as he nestled down in some cattle
fodder by the window of a hut. “To-morrow is one day both for Akela and
for me.”

Then he pressed his face close to the window and watched the fire on
the hearth. He saw the husbandman’s wife get up and feed it in the night
with black lumps. And when the morning came and the mists were all white
and cold, he saw the man’s child pick up a wicker pot plastered inside
with earth, fill it with lumps of red-hot charcoal, put it under his
blanket, and go out to tend the cows in the byre.

“Is that all?” said Mowgli. “If a cub can do it, there is nothing to
fear.” So he strode round the corner and met the boy, took the pot from
his hand, and disappeared into the mist while the boy howled with fear.

“They are very like me,” said Mowgli, blowing into the pot as he had
seen the woman do. “This thing will die if I do not give it things to
eat”; and he dropped twigs and dried bark on the red stuff. Halfway up
the hill he met Bagheera with the morning dew shining like moonstones on
his coat.

“Akela has missed,” said the Panther. “They would have killed him last
night, but they needed thee also. They were looking for thee on the
hill.”

“I was among the plowed lands. I am ready. See!” Mowgli held up the
fire-pot.

“Good! Now, I have seen men thrust a dry branch into that stuff, and
presently the Red Flower blossomed at the end of it. Art thou not
afraid?”

“No. Why should I fear? I remember now--if it is not a dream--how,
before I was a Wolf, I lay beside the Red Flower, and it was warm and
pleasant.”

All that day Mowgli sat in the cave tending his fire pot and dipping
dry branches into it to see how they looked. He found a branch that
satisfied him, and in the evening when Tabaqui came to the cave and told
him rudely enough that he was wanted at the Council Rock, he laughed
till Tabaqui ran away. Then Mowgli went to the Council, still laughing.

Akela the Lone Wolf lay by the side of his rock as a sign that the
leadership of the Pack was open, and Shere Khan with his following of
scrap-fed wolves walked to and fro openly being flattered. Bagheera lay
close to Mowgli, and the fire pot was between Mowgli’s knees. When they
were all gathered together, Shere Khan began to speak--a thing he would
never have dared to do when Akela was in his prime.

“He has no right,” whispered Bagheera. “Say so. He is a dog’s son. He
will be frightened.”

Mowgli sprang to his feet. “Free People,” he cried, “does Shere Khan
lead the Pack? What has a tiger to do with our leadership?”

“Seeing that the leadership is yet open, and being asked to speak--”
 Shere Khan began.

“By whom?” said Mowgli. “Are we all jackals, to fawn on this cattle
butcher? The leadership of the Pack is with the Pack alone.”

There were yells of “Silence, thou man’s cub!” “Let him speak. He has
kept our Law”; and at last the seniors of the Pack thundered: “Let the
Dead Wolf speak.” When a leader of the Pack has missed his kill, he is
called the Dead Wolf as long as he lives, which is not long.

Akela raised his old head wearily:--

“Free People, and ye too, jackals of Shere Khan, for twelve seasons I
have led ye to and from the kill, and in all that time not one has been
trapped or maimed. Now I have missed my kill. Ye know how that plot
was made. Ye know how ye brought me up to an untried buck to make my
weakness known. It was cleverly done. Your right is to kill me here on
the Council Rock, now. Therefore, I ask, who comes to make an end of the
Lone Wolf? For it is my right, by the Law of the Jungle, that ye come
one by one.”

There was a long hush, for no single wolf cared to fight Akela to
the death. Then Shere Khan roared: “Bah! What have we to do with this
toothless fool? He is doomed to die! It is the man-cub who has lived too
long. Free People, he was my meat from the first. Give him to me. I
am weary of this man-wolf folly. He has troubled the jungle for ten
seasons. Give me the man-cub, or I will hunt here always, and not give
you one bone. He is a man, a man’s child, and from the marrow of my
bones I hate him!”

Then more than half the Pack yelled: “A man! A man! What has a man to do
with us? Let him go to his own place.”

“And turn all the people of the villages against us?” clamored Shere
Khan. “No, give him to me. He is a man, and none of us can look him
between the eyes.”

Akela lifted his head again and said, “He has eaten our food. He has
slept with us. He has driven game for us. He has broken no word of the
Law of the Jungle.”

“Also, I paid for him with a bull when he was accepted. The worth of a
bull is little, but Bagheera’s honor is something that he will perhaps
fight for,” said Bagheera in his gentlest voice.

“A bull paid ten years ago!” the Pack snarled. “What do we care for
bones ten years old?”

“Or for a pledge?” said Bagheera, his white teeth bared under his lip.
“Well are ye called the Free People!”

“No man’s cub can run with the people of the jungle,” howled Shere Khan.
“Give him to me!”

“He is our brother in all but blood,” Akela went on, “and ye would kill
him here! In truth, I have lived too long. Some of ye are eaters of
cattle, and of others I have heard that, under Shere Khan’s teaching,
ye go by dark night and snatch children from the villager’s doorstep.
Therefore I know ye to be cowards, and it is to cowards I speak. It is
certain that I must die, and my life is of no worth, or I would offer
that in the man-cub’s place. But for the sake of the Honor of
the Pack,--a little matter that by being without a leader ye have
forgotten,--I promise that if ye let the man-cub go to his own place, I
will not, when my time comes to die, bare one tooth against ye. I will
die without fighting. That will at least save the Pack three lives.
More I cannot do; but if ye will, I can save ye the shame that comes of
killing a brother against whom there is no fault--a brother spoken for
and bought into the Pack according to the Law of the Jungle.”

“He is a man--a man--a man!” snarled the Pack. And most of the wolves
began to gather round Shere Khan, whose tail was beginning to switch.

“Now the business is in thy hands,” said Bagheera to Mowgli. “We can do
no more except fight.”

Mowgli stood upright--the fire pot in his hands. Then he stretched out
his arms, and yawned in the face of the Council; but he was furious with
rage and sorrow, for, wolflike, the wolves had never told him how they
hated him. “Listen you!” he cried. “There is no need for this dog’s
jabber. Ye have told me so often tonight that I am a man (and indeed I
would have been a wolf with you to my life’s end) that I feel your words
are true. So I do not call ye my brothers any more, but sag [dogs], as
a man should. What ye will do, and what ye will not do, is not yours
to say. That matter is with me; and that we may see the matter more
plainly, I, the man, have brought here a little of the Red Flower which
ye, dogs, fear.”

He flung the fire pot on the ground, and some of the red coals lit
a tuft of dried moss that flared up, as all the Council drew back in
terror before the leaping flames.

Mowgli thrust his dead branch into the fire till the twigs lit and
crackled, and whirled it above his head among the cowering wolves.

“Thou art the master,” said Bagheera in an undertone. “Save Akela from
the death. He was ever thy friend.”

Akela, the grim old wolf who had never asked for mercy in his life, gave
one piteous look at Mowgli as the boy stood all naked, his long black
hair tossing over his shoulders in the light of the blazing branch that
made the shadows jump and quiver.

“Good!” said Mowgli, staring round slowly. “I see that ye are dogs. I go
from you to my own people--if they be my own people. The jungle is shut
to me, and I must forget your talk and your companionship. But I will be
more merciful than ye are. Because I was all but your brother in blood,
I promise that when I am a man among men I will not betray ye to men as
ye have betrayed me.” He kicked the fire with his foot, and the sparks
flew up. “There shall be no war between any of us in the Pack. But here
is a debt to pay before I go.” He strode forward to where Shere Khan sat
blinking stupidly at the flames, and caught him by the tuft on his chin.
Bagheera followed in case of accidents. “Up, dog!” Mowgli cried. “Up,
when a man speaks, or I will set that coat ablaze!”

Shere Khan’s ears lay flat back on his head, and he shut his eyes, for
the blazing branch was very near.

“This cattle-killer said he would kill me in the Council because he had
not killed me when I was a cub. Thus and thus, then, do we beat dogs
when we are men. Stir a whisker, Lungri, and I ram the Red Flower down
thy gullet!” He beat Shere Khan over the head with the branch, and the
tiger whimpered and whined in an agony of fear.

“Pah! Singed jungle cat--go now! But remember when next I come to the
Council Rock, as a man should come, it will be with Shere Khan’s hide
on my head. For the rest, Akela goes free to live as he pleases. Ye will
not kill him, because that is not my will. Nor do I think that ye
will sit here any longer, lolling out your tongues as though ye were
somebodies, instead of dogs whom I drive out--thus! Go!” The fire was
burning furiously at the end of the branch, and Mowgli struck right
and left round the circle, and the wolves ran howling with the sparks
burning their fur. At last there were only Akela, Bagheera, and perhaps
ten wolves that had taken Mowgli’s part. Then something began to hurt
Mowgli inside him, as he had never been hurt in his life before, and he
caught his breath and sobbed, and the tears ran down his face.

“What is it? What is it?” he said. “I do not wish to leave the jungle,
and I do not know what this is. Am I dying, Bagheera?”

“No, Little Brother. That is only tears such as men use,” said Bagheera.
“Now I know thou art a man, and a man’s cub no longer. The jungle is
shut indeed to thee henceforward. Let them fall, Mowgli. They are only
tears.” So Mowgli sat and cried as though his heart would break; and he
had never cried in all his life before.

“Now,” he said, “I will go to men. But first I must say farewell to my
mother.” And he went to the cave where she lived with Father Wolf, and
he cried on her coat, while the four cubs howled miserably.

“Ye will not forget me?” said Mowgli.

“Never while we can follow a trail,” said the cubs. “Come to the foot of
the hill when thou art a man, and we will talk to thee; and we will come
into the croplands to play with thee by night.”

“Come soon!” said Father Wolf. “Oh, wise little frog, come again soon;
for we be old, thy mother and I.”

“Come soon,” said Mother Wolf, “little naked son of mine. For, listen,
child of man, I loved thee more than ever I loved my cubs.”

“I will surely come,” said Mowgli. “And when I come it will be to lay
out Shere Khan’s hide upon the Council Rock. Do not forget me! Tell them
in the jungle never to forget me!”

The dawn was beginning to break when Mowgli went down the hillside
alone, to meet those mysterious things that are called men.




Hunting-Song of the Seeonee Pack

     As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur belled
        Once, twice and again!
     And a doe leaped up, and a doe leaped up
     From the pond in the wood where the wild deer sup.
     This I, scouting alone, beheld,
        Once, twice and again!

     As the dawn was breaking the Sambhur belled
        Once, twice and again!
     And a wolf stole back, and a wolf stole back
     To carry the word to the waiting pack,
     And we sought and we found and we bayed on his track
        Once, twice and again!

     As the dawn was breaking the Wolf Pack yelled
        Once, twice and again!
     Feet in the jungle that leave no mark!

     Eyes that can see in the dark--the dark!
     Tongue--give tongue to it!  Hark!  O hark!
        Once, twice and again!




Kaa’s Hunting

     His spots are the joy of the Leopard: his horns are the
        Buffalo’s pride.
     Be clean, for the strength of the hunter is known by the
        gloss of his hide.
     If ye find that the Bullock can toss you, or the heavy-browed
        Sambhur can gore;
     Ye need not stop work to inform us: we knew it ten seasons
        before.
     Oppress not the cubs of the stranger, but hail them as Sister
        and Brother,
     For though they are little and fubsy, it may be the Bear is
        their mother.
     “There is none like to me!” says the Cub in the pride of his
        earliest kill;
     But the jungle is large and the Cub he is small.  Let him
        think and be still.
                                 Maxims of Baloo


All that is told here happened some time before Mowgli was turned out of
the Seeonee Wolf Pack, or revenged himself on Shere Khan the tiger. It
was in the days when Baloo was teaching him the Law of the Jungle. The
big, serious, old brown bear was delighted to have so quick a pupil,
for the young wolves will only learn as much of the Law of the Jungle
as applies to their own pack and tribe, and run away as soon as they can
repeat the Hunting Verse--“Feet that make no noise; eyes that can see in
the dark; ears that can hear the winds in their lairs, and sharp white
teeth, all these things are the marks of our brothers except Tabaqui the
Jackal and the Hyaena whom we hate.” But Mowgli, as a man-cub, had to
learn a great deal more than this. Sometimes Bagheera the Black Panther
would come lounging through the jungle to see how his pet was getting
on, and would purr with his head against a tree while Mowgli recited the
day’s lesson to Baloo. The boy could climb almost as well as he could
swim, and swim almost as well as he could run. So Baloo, the Teacher of
the Law, taught him the Wood and Water Laws: how to tell a rotten branch
from a sound one; how to speak politely to the wild bees when he came
upon a hive of them fifty feet above ground; what to say to Mang the
Bat when he disturbed him in the branches at midday; and how to warn the
water-snakes in the pools before he splashed down among them. None of
the Jungle People like being disturbed, and all are very ready to fly at
an intruder. Then, too, Mowgli was taught the Strangers’ Hunting Call,
which must be repeated aloud till it is answered, whenever one of the
Jungle-People hunts outside his own grounds. It means, translated, “Give
me leave to hunt here because I am hungry.” And the answer is, “Hunt
then for food, but not for pleasure.”

All this will show you how much Mowgli had to learn by heart, and he
grew very tired of saying the same thing over a hundred times. But, as
Baloo said to Bagheera, one day when Mowgli had been cuffed and run off
in a temper, “A man’s cub is a man’s cub, and he must learn all the Law
of the Jungle.”

“But think how small he is,” said the Black Panther, who would have
spoiled Mowgli if he had had his own way. “How can his little head carry
all thy long talk?”

“Is there anything in the jungle too little to be killed? No. That is
why I teach him these things, and that is why I hit him, very softly,
when he forgets.”

“Softly! What dost thou know of softness, old Iron-feet?” Bagheera
grunted. “His face is all bruised today by thy--softness. Ugh.”

“Better he should be bruised from head to foot by me who love him than
that he should come to harm through ignorance,” Baloo answered very
earnestly. “I am now teaching him the Master Words of the Jungle that
shall protect him with the birds and the Snake People, and all that hunt
on four feet, except his own pack. He can now claim protection, if he
will only remember the words, from all in the jungle. Is not that worth
a little beating?”

“Well, look to it then that thou dost not kill the man-cub. He is no
tree trunk to sharpen thy blunt claws upon. But what are those Master
Words? I am more likely to give help than to ask it”--Bagheera stretched
out one paw and admired the steel-blue, ripping-chisel talons at the end
of it--“still I should like to know.”

“I will call Mowgli and he shall say them--if he will. Come, Little
Brother!”

“My head is ringing like a bee tree,” said a sullen little voice over
their heads, and Mowgli slid down a tree trunk very angry and indignant,
adding as he reached the ground: “I come for Bagheera and not for thee,
fat old Baloo!”

“That is all one to me,” said Baloo, though he was hurt and grieved.
“Tell Bagheera, then, the Master Words of the Jungle that I have taught
thee this day.”

“Master Words for which people?” said Mowgli, delighted to show off.
“The jungle has many tongues. I know them all.”

“A little thou knowest, but not much. See, O Bagheera, they never thank
their teacher. Not one small wolfling has ever come back to thank
old Baloo for his teachings. Say the word for the Hunting-People,
then--great scholar.”

“We be of one blood, ye and I,” said Mowgli, giving the words the Bear
accent which all the Hunting People use.

“Good. Now for the birds.”

Mowgli repeated, with the Kite’s whistle at the end of the sentence.

“Now for the Snake-People,” said Bagheera.

The answer was a perfectly indescribable hiss, and Mowgli kicked up his
feet behind, clapped his hands together to applaud himself, and jumped
on to Bagheera’s back, where he sat sideways, drumming with his heels on
the glossy skin and making the worst faces he could think of at Baloo.

“There--there! That was worth a little bruise,” said the brown bear
tenderly. “Some day thou wilt remember me.” Then he turned aside to
tell Bagheera how he had begged the Master Words from Hathi the Wild
Elephant, who knows all about these things, and how Hathi had taken
Mowgli down to a pool to get the Snake Word from a water-snake, because
Baloo could not pronounce it, and how Mowgli was now reasonably safe
against all accidents in the jungle, because neither snake, bird, nor
beast would hurt him.

“No one then is to be feared,” Baloo wound up, patting his big furry
stomach with pride.

“Except his own tribe,” said Bagheera, under his breath; and then aloud
to Mowgli, “Have a care for my ribs, Little Brother! What is all this
dancing up and down?”

Mowgli had been trying to make himself heard by pulling at Bagheera’s
shoulder fur and kicking hard. When the two listened to him he was
shouting at the top of his voice, “And so I shall have a tribe of my
own, and lead them through the branches all day long.”

“What is this new folly, little dreamer of dreams?” said Bagheera.

“Yes, and throw branches and dirt at old Baloo,” Mowgli went on. “They
have promised me this. Ah!”

“Whoof!” Baloo’s big paw scooped Mowgli off Bagheera’s back, and as the
boy lay between the big fore-paws he could see the Bear was angry.

“Mowgli,” said Baloo, “thou hast been talking with the Bandar-log--the
Monkey People.”

Mowgli looked at Bagheera to see if the Panther was angry too, and
Bagheera’s eyes were as hard as jade stones.

“Thou hast been with the Monkey People--the gray apes--the people
without a law--the eaters of everything. That is great shame.”

“When Baloo hurt my head,” said Mowgli (he was still on his back), “I
went away, and the gray apes came down from the trees and had pity on
me. No one else cared.” He snuffled a little.

“The pity of the Monkey People!” Baloo snorted. “The stillness of the
mountain stream! The cool of the summer sun! And then, man-cub?”

“And then, and then, they gave me nuts and pleasant things to eat, and
they--they carried me in their arms up to the top of the trees and said
I was their blood brother except that I had no tail, and should be their
leader some day.”

“They have no leader,” said Bagheera. “They lie. They have always lied.”

“They were very kind and bade me come again. Why have I never been taken
among the Monkey People? They stand on their feet as I do. They do
not hit me with their hard paws. They play all day. Let me get up! Bad
Baloo, let me up! I will play with them again.”

“Listen, man-cub,” said the Bear, and his voice rumbled like thunder on
a hot night. “I have taught thee all the Law of the Jungle for all the
peoples of the jungle--except the Monkey-Folk who live in the trees.
They have no law. They are outcasts. They have no speech of their own,
but use the stolen words which they overhear when they listen, and peep,
and wait up above in the branches. Their way is not our way. They are
without leaders. They have no remembrance. They boast and chatter and
pretend that they are a great people about to do great affairs in the
jungle, but the falling of a nut turns their minds to laughter and all
is forgotten. We of the jungle have no dealings with them. We do not
drink where the monkeys drink; we do not go where the monkeys go; we do
not hunt where they hunt; we do not die where they die. Hast thou ever
heard me speak of the Bandar-log till today?”

“No,” said Mowgli in a whisper, for the forest was very still now Baloo
had finished.

“The Jungle-People put them out of their mouths and out of their minds.
They are very many, evil, dirty, shameless, and they desire, if they
have any fixed desire, to be noticed by the Jungle People. But we do not
notice them even when they throw nuts and filth on our heads.”

He had hardly spoken when a shower of nuts and twigs spattered down
through the branches; and they could hear coughings and howlings and
angry jumpings high up in the air among the thin branches.

“The Monkey-People are forbidden,” said Baloo, “forbidden to the
Jungle-People. Remember.”

“Forbidden,” said Bagheera, “but I still think Baloo should have warned
thee against them.”

“I--I? How was I to guess he would play with such dirt. The Monkey
People! Faugh!”

A fresh shower came down on their heads and the two trotted away, taking
Mowgli with them. What Baloo had said about the monkeys was perfectly
true. They belonged to the tree-tops, and as beasts very seldom look
up, there was no occasion for the monkeys and the Jungle-People to cross
each other’s path. But whenever they found a sick wolf, or a wounded
tiger, or bear, the monkeys would torment him, and would throw sticks
and nuts at any beast for fun and in the hope of being noticed. Then
they would howl and shriek senseless songs, and invite the Jungle-People
to climb up their trees and fight them, or would start furious battles
over nothing among themselves, and leave the dead monkeys where the
Jungle-People could see them. They were always just going to have a
leader, and laws and customs of their own, but they never did, because
their memories would not hold over from day to day, and so they
compromised things by making up a saying, “What the Bandar-log think now
the jungle will think later,” and that comforted them a great deal. None
of the beasts could reach them, but on the other hand none of the beasts
would notice them, and that was why they were so pleased when Mowgli
came to play with them, and they heard how angry Baloo was.

They never meant to do any more--the Bandar-log never mean anything at
all; but one of them invented what seemed to him a brilliant idea, and
he told all the others that Mowgli would be a useful person to keep in
the tribe, because he could weave sticks together for protection from
the wind; so, if they caught him, they could make him teach them.
Of course Mowgli, as a woodcutter’s child, inherited all sorts of
instincts, and used to make little huts of fallen branches without
thinking how he came to do it. The Monkey-People, watching in the trees,
considered his play most wonderful. This time, they said, they were
really going to have a leader and become the wisest people in the
jungle--so wise that everyone else would notice and envy them. Therefore
they followed Baloo and Bagheera and Mowgli through the jungle very
quietly till it was time for the midday nap, and Mowgli, who was
very much ashamed of himself, slept between the Panther and the Bear,
resolving to have no more to do with the Monkey People.

The next thing he remembered was feeling hands on his legs and
arms--hard, strong, little hands--and then a swash of branches in his
face, and then he was staring down through the swaying boughs as Baloo
woke the jungle with his deep cries and Bagheera bounded up the trunk
with every tooth bared. The Bandar-log howled with triumph and scuffled
away to the upper branches where Bagheera dared not follow, shouting:
“He has noticed us! Bagheera has noticed us. All the Jungle-People
admire us for our skill and our cunning.” Then they began their flight;
and the flight of the Monkey-People through tree-land is one of
the things nobody can describe. They have their regular roads and
crossroads, up hills and down hills, all laid out from fifty to seventy
or a hundred feet above ground, and by these they can travel even at
night if necessary. Two of the strongest monkeys caught Mowgli under
the arms and swung off with him through the treetops, twenty feet at a
bound. Had they been alone they could have gone twice as fast, but the
boy’s weight held them back. Sick and giddy as Mowgli was he could not
help enjoying the wild rush, though the glimpses of earth far down below
frightened him, and the terrible check and jerk at the end of the swing
over nothing but empty air brought his heart between his teeth. His
escort would rush him up a tree till he felt the thinnest topmost
branches crackle and bend under them, and then with a cough and a whoop
would fling themselves into the air outward and downward, and bring
up, hanging by their hands or their feet to the lower limbs of the next
tree. Sometimes he could see for miles and miles across the still green
jungle, as a man on the top of a mast can see for miles across the sea,
and then the branches and leaves would lash him across the face, and he
and his two guards would be almost down to earth again. So, bounding and
crashing and whooping and yelling, the whole tribe of Bandar-log swept
along the tree-roads with Mowgli their prisoner.

For a time he was afraid of being dropped. Then he grew angry but knew
better than to struggle, and then he began to think. The first thing was
to send back word to Baloo and Bagheera, for, at the pace the monkeys
were going, he knew his friends would be left far behind. It was useless
to look down, for he could only see the topsides of the branches, so he
stared upward and saw, far away in the blue, Rann the Kite balancing
and wheeling as he kept watch over the jungle waiting for things to die.
Rann saw that the monkeys were carrying something, and dropped a
few hundred yards to find out whether their load was good to eat. He
whistled with surprise when he saw Mowgli being dragged up to a treetop
and heard him give the Kite call for--“We be of one blood, thou and I.”
 The waves of the branches closed over the boy, but Rann balanced away to
the next tree in time to see the little brown face come up again. “Mark
my trail!” Mowgli shouted. “Tell Baloo of the Seeonee Pack and Bagheera
of the Council Rock.”

“In whose name, Brother?” Rann had never seen Mowgli before, though of
course he had heard of him.

“Mowgli, the Frog. Man-cub they call me! Mark my trail!”

The last words were shrieked as he was being swung through the air, but
Rann nodded and rose up till he looked no bigger than a speck of dust,
and there he hung, watching with his telescope eyes the swaying of the
treetops as Mowgli’s escort whirled along.

“They never go far,” he said with a chuckle. “They never do what they
set out to do. Always pecking at new things are the Bandar-log. This
time, if I have any eye-sight, they have pecked down trouble for
themselves, for Baloo is no fledgling and Bagheera can, as I know, kill
more than goats.”

So he rocked on his wings, his feet gathered up under him, and waited.

Meantime, Baloo and Bagheera were furious with rage and grief. Bagheera
climbed as he had never climbed before, but the thin branches broke
beneath his weight, and he slipped down, his claws full of bark.

“Why didst thou not warn the man-cub?” he roared to poor Baloo, who had
set off at a clumsy trot in the hope of overtaking the monkeys. “What
was the use of half slaying him with blows if thou didst not warn him?”

“Haste! O haste! We--we may catch them yet!” Baloo panted.

“At that speed! It would not tire a wounded cow. Teacher of the
Law--cub-beater--a mile of that rolling to and fro would burst thee
open. Sit still and think! Make a plan. This is no time for chasing.
They may drop him if we follow too close.”

“Arrula! Whoo! They may have dropped him already, being tired of
carrying him. Who can trust the Bandar-log? Put dead bats on my head!
Give me black bones to eat! Roll me into the hives of the wild bees
that I may be stung to death, and bury me with the Hyaena, for I am most
miserable of bears! Arulala! Wahooa! O Mowgli, Mowgli! Why did I not
warn thee against the Monkey-Folk instead of breaking thy head? Now
perhaps I may have knocked the day’s lesson out of his mind, and he will
be alone in the jungle without the Master Words.”

Baloo clasped his paws over his ears and rolled to and fro moaning.

“At least he gave me all the Words correctly a little time ago,” said
Bagheera impatiently. “Baloo, thou hast neither memory nor respect. What
would the jungle think if I, the Black Panther, curled myself up like
Ikki the Porcupine, and howled?”

“What do I care what the jungle thinks? He may be dead by now.”

“Unless and until they drop him from the branches in sport, or kill him
out of idleness, I have no fear for the man-cub. He is wise and well
taught, and above all he has the eyes that make the Jungle-People
afraid. But (and it is a great evil) he is in the power of the
Bandar-log, and they, because they live in trees, have no fear of any of
our people.” Bagheera licked one forepaw thoughtfully.

“Fool that I am! Oh, fat, brown, root-digging fool that I am,” said
Baloo, uncoiling himself with a jerk, “it is true what Hathi the Wild
Elephant says: `To each his own fear’; and they, the Bandar-log, fear
Kaa the Rock Snake. He can climb as well as they can. He steals the
young monkeys in the night. The whisper of his name makes their wicked
tails cold. Let us go to Kaa.”

“What will he do for us? He is not of our tribe, being footless--and
with most evil eyes,” said Bagheera.

“He is very old and very cunning. Above all, he is always hungry,” said
Baloo hopefully. “Promise him many goats.”

“He sleeps for a full month after he has once eaten. He may be asleep
now, and even were he awake what if he would rather kill his own goats?”
 Bagheera, who did not know much about Kaa, was naturally suspicious.

“Then in that case, thou and I together, old hunter, might make him see
reason.” Here Baloo rubbed his faded brown shoulder against the Panther,
and they went off to look for Kaa the Rock Python.

They found him stretched out on a warm ledge in the afternoon sun,
admiring his beautiful new coat, for he had been in retirement for the
last ten days changing his skin, and now he was very splendid--darting
his big blunt-nosed head along the ground, and twisting the thirty feet
of his body into fantastic knots and curves, and licking his lips as he
thought of his dinner to come.

“He has not eaten,” said Baloo, with a grunt of relief, as soon as
he saw the beautifully mottled brown and yellow jacket. “Be careful,
Bagheera! He is always a little blind after he has changed his skin, and
very quick to strike.”

Kaa was not a poison snake--in fact he rather despised the poison snakes
as cowards--but his strength lay in his hug, and when he had once
lapped his huge coils round anybody there was no more to be said. “Good
hunting!” cried Baloo, sitting up on his haunches. Like all snakes of
his breed Kaa was rather deaf, and did not hear the call at first. Then
he curled up ready for any accident, his head lowered.

“Good hunting for us all,” he answered. “Oho, Baloo, what dost thou do
here? Good hunting, Bagheera. One of us at least needs food. Is there
any news of game afoot? A doe now, or even a young buck? I am as empty
as a dried well.”

“We are hunting,” said Baloo carelessly. He knew that you must not hurry
Kaa. He is too big.

“Give me permission to come with you,” said Kaa. “A blow more or less is
nothing to thee, Bagheera or Baloo, but I--I have to wait and wait for
days in a wood-path and climb half a night on the mere chance of a
young ape. Psshaw! The branches are not what they were when I was young.
Rotten twigs and dry boughs are they all.”

“Maybe thy great weight has something to do with the matter,” said
Baloo.

“I am a fair length--a fair length,” said Kaa with a little pride. “But
for all that, it is the fault of this new-grown timber. I came very
near to falling on my last hunt--very near indeed--and the noise of my
slipping, for my tail was not tight wrapped around the tree, waked the
Bandar-log, and they called me most evil names.”

“Footless, yellow earth-worm,” said Bagheera under his whiskers, as
though he were trying to remember something.

“Sssss! Have they ever called me that?” said Kaa.

“Something of that kind it was that they shouted to us last moon, but we
never noticed them. They will say anything--even that thou hast lost all
thy teeth, and wilt not face anything bigger than a kid, because (they
are indeed shameless, these Bandar-log)--because thou art afraid of the
he-goat’s horns,” Bagheera went on sweetly.

Now a snake, especially a wary old python like Kaa, very seldom shows
that he is angry, but Baloo and Bagheera could see the big swallowing
muscles on either side of Kaa’s throat ripple and bulge.

“The Bandar-log have shifted their grounds,” he said quietly. “When I
came up into the sun today I heard them whooping among the tree-tops.”

“It--it is the Bandar-log that we follow now,” said Baloo, but the words
stuck in his throat, for that was the first time in his memory that one
of the Jungle-People had owned to being interested in the doings of the
monkeys.

“Beyond doubt then it is no small thing that takes two such
hunters--leaders in their own jungle I am certain--on the trail of the
Bandar-log,” Kaa replied courteously, as he swelled with curiosity.

“Indeed,” Baloo began, “I am no more than the old and sometimes very
foolish Teacher of the Law to the Seeonee wolf-cubs, and Bagheera
here--”

“Is Bagheera,” said the Black Panther, and his jaws shut with a snap,
for he did not believe in being humble. “The trouble is this, Kaa. Those
nut-stealers and pickers of palm leaves have stolen away our man-cub of
whom thou hast perhaps heard.”

“I heard some news from Ikki (his quills make him presumptuous) of a
man-thing that was entered into a wolf pack, but I did not believe. Ikki
is full of stories half heard and very badly told.”

“But it is true. He is such a man-cub as never was,” said Baloo. “The
best and wisest and boldest of man-cubs--my own pupil, who shall
make the name of Baloo famous through all the jungles; and besides,
I--we--love him, Kaa.”

“Ts! Ts!” said Kaa, weaving his head to and fro. “I also have known what
love is. There are tales I could tell that--”

“That need a clear night when we are all well fed to praise properly,”
 said Bagheera quickly. “Our man-cub is in the hands of the Bandar-log
now, and we know that of all the Jungle-People they fear Kaa alone.”

“They fear me alone. They have good reason,” said Kaa. “Chattering,
foolish, vain--vain, foolish, and chattering, are the monkeys. But a
man-thing in their hands is in no good luck. They grow tired of the nuts
they pick, and throw them down. They carry a branch half a day, meaning
to do great things with it, and then they snap it in two. That man-thing
is not to be envied. They called me also--`yellow fish’ was it not?”

“Worm--worm--earth-worm,” said Bagheera, “as well as other things which
I cannot now say for shame.”

“We must remind them to speak well of their master. Aaa-ssp! We must
help their wandering memories. Now, whither went they with the cub?”

“The jungle alone knows. Toward the sunset, I believe,” said Baloo. “We
had thought that thou wouldst know, Kaa.”

“I? How? I take them when they come in my way, but I do not hunt the
Bandar-log, or frogs--or green scum on a water-hole, for that matter.”

“Up, Up! Up, Up! Hillo! Illo! Illo, look up, Baloo of the Seeonee Wolf
Pack!”

Baloo looked up to see where the voice came from, and there was Rann the
Kite, sweeping down with the sun shining on the upturned flanges of his
wings. It was near Rann’s bedtime, but he had ranged all over the jungle
looking for the Bear and had missed him in the thick foliage.

“What is it?” said Baloo.

“I have seen Mowgli among the Bandar-log. He bade me tell you. I
watched. The Bandar-log have taken him beyond the river to the monkey
city--to the Cold Lairs. They may stay there for a night, or ten nights,
or an hour. I have told the bats to watch through the dark time. That is
my message. Good hunting, all you below!”

“Full gorge and a deep sleep to you, Rann,” cried Bagheera. “I will
remember thee in my next kill, and put aside the head for thee alone, O
best of kites!”

“It is nothing. It is nothing. The boy held the Master Word. I could
have done no less,” and Rann circled up again to his roost.

“He has not forgotten to use his tongue,” said Baloo with a chuckle of
pride. “To think of one so young remembering the Master Word for the
birds too while he was being pulled across trees!”

“It was most firmly driven into him,” said Bagheera. “But I am proud of
him, and now we must go to the Cold Lairs.”

They all knew where that place was, but few of the Jungle People ever
went there, because what they called the Cold Lairs was an old deserted
city, lost and buried in the jungle, and beasts seldom use a place that
men have once used. The wild boar will, but the hunting tribes do not.
Besides, the monkeys lived there as much as they could be said to live
anywhere, and no self-respecting animal would come within eyeshot of it
except in times of drought, when the half-ruined tanks and reservoirs
held a little water.

“It is half a night’s journey--at full speed,” said Bagheera, and Baloo
looked very serious. “I will go as fast as I can,” he said anxiously.

“We dare not wait for thee. Follow, Baloo. We must go on the
quick-foot--Kaa and I.”

“Feet or no feet, I can keep abreast of all thy four,” said Kaa shortly.
Baloo made one effort to hurry, but had to sit down panting, and so they
left him to come on later, while Bagheera hurried forward, at the quick
panther-canter. Kaa said nothing, but, strive as Bagheera might, the
huge Rock-python held level with him. When they came to a hill stream,
Bagheera gained, because he bounded across while Kaa swam, his head and
two feet of his neck clearing the water, but on level ground Kaa made up
the distance.

“By the Broken Lock that freed me,” said Bagheera, when twilight had
fallen, “thou art no slow goer!”

“I am hungry,” said Kaa. “Besides, they called me speckled frog.”

“Worm--earth-worm, and yellow to boot.”

“All one. Let us go on,” and Kaa seemed to pour himself along the
ground, finding the shortest road with his steady eyes, and keeping to
it.

In the Cold Lairs the Monkey-People were not thinking of Mowgli’s
friends at all. They had brought the boy to the Lost City, and were
very much pleased with themselves for the time. Mowgli had never seen an
Indian city before, and though this was almost a heap of ruins it seemed
very wonderful and splendid. Some king had built it long ago on a little
hill. You could still trace the stone causeways that led up to the
ruined gates where the last splinters of wood hung to the worn, rusted
hinges. Trees had grown into and out of the walls; the battlements were
tumbled down and decayed, and wild creepers hung out of the windows of
the towers on the walls in bushy hanging clumps.

A great roofless palace crowned the hill, and the marble of the
courtyards and the fountains was split, and stained with red and green,
and the very cobblestones in the courtyard where the king’s elephants
used to live had been thrust up and apart by grasses and young trees.
From the palace you could see the rows and rows of roofless houses that
made up the city looking like empty honeycombs filled with blackness;
the shapeless block of stone that had been an idol in the square where
four roads met; the pits and dimples at street corners where the public
wells once stood, and the shattered domes of temples with wild figs
sprouting on their sides. The monkeys called the place their city, and
pretended to despise the Jungle-People because they lived in the forest.
And yet they never knew what the buildings were made for nor how to
use them. They would sit in circles on the hall of the king’s council
chamber, and scratch for fleas and pretend to be men; or they would run
in and out of the roofless houses and collect pieces of plaster and old
bricks in a corner, and forget where they had hidden them, and fight
and cry in scuffling crowds, and then break off to play up and down the
terraces of the king’s garden, where they would shake the rose trees and
the oranges in sport to see the fruit and flowers fall. They explored
all the passages and dark tunnels in the palace and the hundreds of
little dark rooms, but they never remembered what they had seen and what
they had not; and so drifted about in ones and twos or crowds telling
each other that they were doing as men did. They drank at the tanks and
made the water all muddy, and then they fought over it, and then they
would all rush together in mobs and shout: “There is no one in the
jungle so wise and good and clever and strong and gentle as the
Bandar-log.” Then all would begin again till they grew tired of the city
and went back to the tree-tops, hoping the Jungle-People would notice
them.

Mowgli, who had been trained under the Law of the Jungle, did not like
or understand this kind of life. The monkeys dragged him into the Cold
Lairs late in the afternoon, and instead of going to sleep, as Mowgli
would have done after a long journey, they joined hands and danced about
and sang their foolish songs. One of the monkeys made a speech and told
his companions that Mowgli’s capture marked a new thing in the history
of the Bandar-log, for Mowgli was going to show them how to weave sticks
and canes together as a protection against rain and cold. Mowgli picked
up some creepers and began to work them in and out, and the monkeys
tried to imitate; but in a very few minutes they lost interest and began
to pull their friends’ tails or jump up and down on all fours, coughing.

“I wish to eat,” said Mowgli. “I am a stranger in this part of the
jungle. Bring me food, or give me leave to hunt here.”

Twenty or thirty monkeys bounded away to bring him nuts and wild
pawpaws. But they fell to fighting on the road, and it was too much
trouble to go back with what was left of the fruit. Mowgli was sore and
angry as well as hungry, and he roamed through the empty city giving the
Strangers’ Hunting Call from time to time, but no one answered him, and
Mowgli felt that he had reached a very bad place indeed. “All that Baloo
has said about the Bandar-log is true,” he thought to himself. “They
have no Law, no Hunting Call, and no leaders--nothing but foolish words
and little picking thievish hands. So if I am starved or killed here,
it will be all my own fault. But I must try to return to my own jungle.
Baloo will surely beat me, but that is better than chasing silly rose
leaves with the Bandar-log.”

No sooner had he walked to the city wall than the monkeys pulled him
back, telling him that he did not know how happy he was, and pinching
him to make him grateful. He set his teeth and said nothing, but
went with the shouting monkeys to a terrace above the red sandstone
reservoirs that were half-full of rain water. There was a ruined
summer-house of white marble in the center of the terrace, built for
queens dead a hundred years ago. The domed roof had half fallen in and
blocked up the underground passage from the palace by which the
queens used to enter. But the walls were made of screens of marble
tracery--beautiful milk-white fretwork, set with agates and cornelians
and jasper and lapis lazuli, and as the moon came up behind the hill it
shone through the open work, casting shadows on the ground like black
velvet embroidery. Sore, sleepy, and hungry as he was, Mowgli could not
help laughing when the Bandar-log began, twenty at a time, to tell him
how great and wise and strong and gentle they were, and how foolish he
was to wish to leave them. “We are great. We are free. We are wonderful.
We are the most wonderful people in all the jungle! We all say so, and
so it must be true,” they shouted. “Now as you are a new listener and
can carry our words back to the Jungle-People so that they may notice us
in future, we will tell you all about our most excellent selves.” Mowgli
made no objection, and the monkeys gathered by hundreds and hundreds on
the terrace to listen to their own speakers singing the praises of the
Bandar-log, and whenever a speaker stopped for want of breath they would
all shout together: “This is true; we all say so.” Mowgli nodded and
blinked, and said “Yes” when they asked him a question, and his head
spun with the noise. “Tabaqui the Jackal must have bitten all these
people,” he said to himself, “and now they have madness. Certainly this
is dewanee, the madness. Do they never go to sleep? Now there is a cloud
coming to cover that moon. If it were only a big enough cloud I might
try to run away in the darkness. But I am tired.”

That same cloud was being watched by two good friends in the ruined
ditch below the city wall, for Bagheera and Kaa, knowing well how
dangerous the Monkey-People were in large numbers, did not wish to run
any risks. The monkeys never fight unless they are a hundred to one, and
few in the jungle care for those odds.

“I will go to the west wall,” Kaa whispered, “and come down swiftly with
the slope of the ground in my favor. They will not throw themselves upon
my back in their hundreds, but--”

“I know it,” said Bagheera. “Would that Baloo were here, but we must do
what we can. When that cloud covers the moon I shall go to the terrace.
They hold some sort of council there over the boy.”

“Good hunting,” said Kaa grimly, and glided away to the west wall. That
happened to be the least ruined of any, and the big snake was delayed
awhile before he could find a way up the stones. The cloud hid the moon,
and as Mowgli wondered what would come next he heard Bagheera’s light
feet on the terrace. The Black Panther had raced up the slope almost
without a sound and was striking--he knew better than to waste time in
biting--right and left among the monkeys, who were seated round Mowgli
in circles fifty and sixty deep. There was a howl of fright and rage,
and then as Bagheera tripped on the rolling kicking bodies beneath him,
a monkey shouted: “There is only one here! Kill him! Kill.” A scuffling
mass of monkeys, biting, scratching, tearing, and pulling, closed over
Bagheera, while five or six laid hold of Mowgli, dragged him up the wall
of the summerhouse and pushed him through the hole of the broken dome.
A man-trained boy would have been badly bruised, for the fall was a
good fifteen feet, but Mowgli fell as Baloo had taught him to fall, and
landed on his feet.

“Stay there,” shouted the monkeys, “till we have killed thy friends, and
later we will play with thee--if the Poison-People leave thee alive.”

“We be of one blood, ye and I,” said Mowgli, quickly giving the Snake’s
Call. He could hear rustling and hissing in the rubbish all round him
and gave the Call a second time, to make sure.

“Even ssso! Down hoods all!” said half a dozen low voices (every ruin
in India becomes sooner or later a dwelling place of snakes, and the old
summerhouse was alive with cobras). “Stand still, Little Brother, for
thy feet may do us harm.”

Mowgli stood as quietly as he could, peering through the open work and
listening to the furious din of the fight round the Black Panther--the
yells and chatterings and scufflings, and Bagheera’s deep, hoarse cough
as he backed and bucked and twisted and plunged under the heaps of his
enemies. For the first time since he was born, Bagheera was fighting for
his life.

“Baloo must be at hand; Bagheera would not have come alone,” Mowgli
thought. And then he called aloud: “To the tank, Bagheera. Roll to the
water tanks. Roll and plunge! Get to the water!”

Bagheera heard, and the cry that told him Mowgli was safe gave him new
courage. He worked his way desperately, inch by inch, straight for the
reservoirs, halting in silence. Then from the ruined wall nearest the
jungle rose up the rumbling war-shout of Baloo. The old Bear had done
his best, but he could not come before. “Bagheera,” he shouted, “I am
here. I climb! I haste! Ahuwora! The stones slip under my feet! Wait my
coming, O most infamous Bandar-log!” He panted up the terrace only
to disappear to the head in a wave of monkeys, but he threw himself
squarely on his haunches, and, spreading out his forepaws, hugged as
many as he could hold, and then began to hit with a regular bat-bat-bat,
like the flipping strokes of a paddle wheel. A crash and a splash told
Mowgli that Bagheera had fought his way to the tank where the monkeys
could not follow. The Panther lay gasping for breath, his head just
out of the water, while the monkeys stood three deep on the red steps,
dancing up and down with rage, ready to spring upon him from all sides
if he came out to help Baloo. It was then that Bagheera lifted up his
dripping chin, and in despair gave the Snake’s Call for protection--“We
be of one blood, ye and I”--for he believed that Kaa had turned tail
at the last minute. Even Baloo, half smothered under the monkeys on
the edge of the terrace, could not help chuckling as he heard the Black
Panther asking for help.

Kaa had only just worked his way over the west wall, landing with a
wrench that dislodged a coping stone into the ditch. He had no intention
of losing any advantage of the ground, and coiled and uncoiled himself
once or twice, to be sure that every foot of his long body was in
working order. All that while the fight with Baloo went on, and the
monkeys yelled in the tank round Bagheera, and Mang the Bat, flying to
and fro, carried the news of the great battle over the jungle, till even
Hathi the Wild Elephant trumpeted, and, far away, scattered bands of
the Monkey-Folk woke and came leaping along the tree-roads to help their
comrades in the Cold Lairs, and the noise of the fight roused all the
day birds for miles round. Then Kaa came straight, quickly, and anxious
to kill. The fighting strength of a python is in the driving blow of
his head backed by all the strength and weight of his body. If you can
imagine a lance, or a battering ram, or a hammer weighing nearly half
a ton driven by a cool, quiet mind living in the handle of it, you can
roughly imagine what Kaa was like when he fought. A python four or five
feet long can knock a man down if he hits him fairly in the chest, and
Kaa was thirty feet long, as you know. His first stroke was delivered
into the heart of the crowd round Baloo. It was sent home with shut
mouth in silence, and there was no need of a second. The monkeys
scattered with cries of--“Kaa! It is Kaa! Run! Run!”

Generations of monkeys had been scared into good behavior by the stories
their elders told them of Kaa, the night thief, who could slip along the
branches as quietly as moss grows, and steal away the strongest monkey
that ever lived; of old Kaa, who could make himself look so like a dead
branch or a rotten stump that the wisest were deceived, till the branch
caught them. Kaa was everything that the monkeys feared in the jungle,
for none of them knew the limits of his power, none of them could look
him in the face, and none had ever come alive out of his hug. And so
they ran, stammering with terror, to the walls and the roofs of the
houses, and Baloo drew a deep breath of relief. His fur was much thicker
than Bagheera’s, but he had suffered sorely in the fight. Then Kaa
opened his mouth for the first time and spoke one long hissing word, and
the far-away monkeys, hurrying to the defense of the Cold Lairs, stayed
where they were, cowering, till the loaded branches bent and crackled
under them. The monkeys on the walls and the empty houses stopped
their cries, and in the stillness that fell upon the city Mowgli heard
Bagheera shaking his wet sides as he came up from the tank. Then the
clamor broke out again. The monkeys leaped higher up the walls. They
clung around the necks of the big stone idols and shrieked as they
skipped along the battlements, while Mowgli, dancing in the summerhouse,
put his eye to the screenwork and hooted owl-fashion between his front
teeth, to show his derision and contempt.

“Get the man-cub out of that trap; I can do no more,” Bagheera gasped.
“Let us take the man-cub and go. They may attack again.”

“They will not move till I order them. Stay you sssso!” Kaa hissed, and
the city was silent once more. “I could not come before, Brother, but I
think I heard thee call”--this was to Bagheera.

“I--I may have cried out in the battle,” Bagheera answered. “Baloo, art
thou hurt?

“I am not sure that they did not pull me into a hundred little
bearlings,” said Baloo, gravely shaking one leg after the other. “Wow! I
am sore. Kaa, we owe thee, I think, our lives--Bagheera and I.”

“No matter. Where is the manling?”

“Here, in a trap. I cannot climb out,” cried Mowgli. The curve of the
broken dome was above his head.

“Take him away. He dances like Mao the Peacock. He will crush our
young,” said the cobras inside.

“Hah!” said Kaa with a chuckle, “he has friends everywhere, this
manling. Stand back, manling. And hide you, O Poison People. I break
down the wall.”

Kaa looked carefully till he found a discolored crack in the marble
tracery showing a weak spot, made two or three light taps with his head
to get the distance, and then lifting up six feet of his body clear
of the ground, sent home half a dozen full-power smashing blows,
nose-first. The screen-work broke and fell away in a cloud of dust and
rubbish, and Mowgli leaped through the opening and flung himself between
Baloo and Bagheera--an arm around each big neck.

“Art thou hurt?” said Baloo, hugging him softly.

“I am sore, hungry, and not a little bruised. But, oh, they have handled
ye grievously, my Brothers! Ye bleed.”

“Others also,” said Bagheera, licking his lips and looking at the
monkey-dead on the terrace and round the tank.

“It is nothing, it is nothing, if thou art safe, oh, my pride of all
little frogs!” whimpered Baloo.

“Of that we shall judge later,” said Bagheera, in a dry voice that
Mowgli did not at all like. “But here is Kaa to whom we owe the battle
and thou owest thy life. Thank him according to our customs, Mowgli.”

Mowgli turned and saw the great Python’s head swaying a foot above his
own.

“So this is the manling,” said Kaa. “Very soft is his skin, and he is
not unlike the Bandar-log. Have a care, manling, that I do not mistake
thee for a monkey some twilight when I have newly changed my coat.”

“We be one blood, thou and I,” Mowgli answered. “I take my life from
thee tonight. My kill shall be thy kill if ever thou art hungry, O Kaa.”

“All thanks, Little Brother,” said Kaa, though his eyes twinkled. “And
what may so bold a hunter kill? I ask that I may follow when next he
goes abroad.”

“I kill nothing,--I am too little,--but I drive goats toward such as can
use them. When thou art empty come to me and see if I speak the truth.
I have some skill in these [he held out his hands], and if ever thou art
in a trap, I may pay the debt which I owe to thee, to Bagheera, and to
Baloo, here. Good hunting to ye all, my masters.”

“Well said,” growled Baloo, for Mowgli had returned thanks very
prettily. The Python dropped his head lightly for a minute on Mowgli’s
shoulder. “A brave heart and a courteous tongue,” said he. “They shall
carry thee far through the jungle, manling. But now go hence quickly
with thy friends. Go and sleep, for the moon sets, and what follows it
is not well that thou shouldst see.”

The moon was sinking behind the hills and the lines of trembling monkeys
huddled together on the walls and battlements looked like ragged shaky
fringes of things. Baloo went down to the tank for a drink and Bagheera
began to put his fur in order, as Kaa glided out into the center of the
terrace and brought his jaws together with a ringing snap that drew all
the monkeys’ eyes upon him.

“The moon sets,” he said. “Is there yet light enough to see?”

From the walls came a moan like the wind in the tree-tops--“We see, O
Kaa.”

“Good. Begins now the dance--the Dance of the Hunger of Kaa. Sit still
and watch.”

He turned twice or thrice in a big circle, weaving his head from right
to left. Then he began making loops and figures of eight with his
body, and soft, oozy triangles that melted into squares and five-sided
figures, and coiled mounds, never resting, never hurrying, and never
stopping his low humming song. It grew darker and darker, till at last
the dragging, shifting coils disappeared, but they could hear the rustle
of the scales.

Baloo and Bagheera stood still as stone, growling in their throats,
their neck hair bristling, and Mowgli watched and wondered.

“Bandar-log,” said the voice of Kaa at last, “can ye stir foot or hand
without my order? Speak!”

“Without thy order we cannot stir foot or hand, O Kaa!”

“Good! Come all one pace nearer to me.”

The lines of the monkeys swayed forward helplessly, and Baloo and
Bagheera took one stiff step forward with them.

“Nearer!” hissed Kaa, and they all moved again.

Mowgli laid his hands on Baloo and Bagheera to get them away, and the
two great beasts started as though they had been waked from a dream.

“Keep thy hand on my shoulder,” Bagheera whispered. “Keep it there, or I
must go back--must go back to Kaa. Aah!”

“It is only old Kaa making circles on the dust,” said Mowgli. “Let us
go.” And the three slipped off through a gap in the walls to the jungle.

“Whoof!” said Baloo, when he stood under the still trees again. “Never
more will I make an ally of Kaa,” and he shook himself all over.

“He knows more than we,” said Bagheera, trembling. “In a little time,
had I stayed, I should have walked down his throat.”

“Many will walk by that road before the moon rises again,” said Baloo.
“He will have good hunting--after his own fashion.”

“But what was the meaning of it all?” said Mowgli, who did not know
anything of a python’s powers of fascination. “I saw no more than a big
snake making foolish circles till the dark came. And his nose was all
sore. Ho! Ho!”

“Mowgli,” said Bagheera angrily, “his nose was sore on thy account, as
my ears and sides and paws, and Baloo’s neck and shoulders are bitten
on thy account. Neither Baloo nor Bagheera will be able to hunt with
pleasure for many days.”

“It is nothing,” said Baloo; “we have the man-cub again.”

“True, but he has cost us heavily in time which might have been spent in
good hunting, in wounds, in hair--I am half plucked along my back--and
last of all, in honor. For, remember, Mowgli, I, who am the Black
Panther, was forced to call upon Kaa for protection, and Baloo and I
were both made stupid as little birds by the Hunger Dance. All this,
man-cub, came of thy playing with the Bandar-log.”

“True, it is true,” said Mowgli sorrowfully. “I am an evil man-cub, and
my stomach is sad in me.”

“Mf! What says the Law of the Jungle, Baloo?”

Baloo did not wish to bring Mowgli into any more trouble, but he could
not tamper with the Law, so he mumbled: “Sorrow never stays punishment.
But remember, Bagheera, he is very little.”

“I will remember. But he has done mischief, and blows must be dealt now.
Mowgli, hast thou anything to say?”

“Nothing. I did wrong. Baloo and thou are wounded. It is just.”

Bagheera gave him half a dozen love-taps from a panther’s point of
view (they would hardly have waked one of his own cubs), but for a
seven-year-old boy they amounted to as severe a beating as you could
wish to avoid. When it was all over Mowgli sneezed, and picked himself
up without a word.

“Now,” said Bagheera, “jump on my back, Little Brother, and we will go
home.”

One of the beauties of Jungle Law is that punishment settles all scores.
There is no nagging afterward.

Mowgli laid his head down on Bagheera’s back and slept so deeply that he
never waked when he was put down in the home-cave.




Road-Song of the Bandar-Log

     Here we go in a flung festoon,
     Half-way up to the jealous moon!
     Don’t you envy our pranceful bands?
     Don’t you wish you had extra hands?
     Wouldn’t you like if your tails were--so--
     Curved in the shape of a Cupid’s bow?
        Now you’re angry, but--never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!

     Here we sit in a branchy row,
     Thinking of beautiful things we know;
     Dreaming of deeds that we mean to do,
     All complete, in a minute or two--
     Something noble and wise and good,
     Done by merely wishing we could.
        We’ve forgotten, but--never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!

     All the talk we ever have heard
     Uttered by bat or beast or bird--
     Hide or fin or scale or feather--
     Jabber it quickly and all together!
     Excellent!  Wonderful!  Once again!

     Now we are talking just like men!
        Let’s pretend we are ... never mind,
        Brother, thy tail hangs down behind!
        This is the way of the Monkey-kind.

     Then join our leaping lines that scumfish through the pines,
     That rocket by where, light and high, the wild grape swings.
     By the rubbish in our wake, and the noble noise we make,
     Be sure, be sure, we’re going to do some splendid things!




“Tiger! Tiger!”

     What of the hunting, hunter bold?
        Brother, the watch was long and cold.
     What of the quarry ye went to kill?
        Brother, he crops in the jungle still.
     Where is the power that made your pride?
        Brother, it ebbs from my flank and side.
     Where is the haste that ye hurry by?
        Brother, I go to my lair--to die.

Now we must go back to the first tale. When Mowgli left the wolf’s cave
after the fight with the Pack at the Council Rock, he went down to the
plowed lands where the villagers lived, but he would not stop there
because it was too near to the jungle, and he knew that he had made at
least one bad enemy at the Council. So he hurried on, keeping to
the rough road that ran down the valley, and followed it at a steady
jog-trot for nearly twenty miles, till he came to a country that he
did not know. The valley opened out into a great plain dotted over with
rocks and cut up by ravines. At one end stood a little village, and at
the other the thick jungle came down in a sweep to the grazing-grounds,
and stopped there as though it had been cut off with a hoe. All over the
plain, cattle and buffaloes were grazing, and when the little boys in
charge of the herds saw Mowgli they shouted and ran away, and the yellow
pariah dogs that hang about every Indian village barked. Mowgli walked
on, for he was feeling hungry, and when he came to the village gate he
saw the big thorn-bush that was drawn up before the gate at twilight,
pushed to one side.

“Umph!” he said, for he had come across more than one such barricade in
his night rambles after things to eat. “So men are afraid of the People
of the Jungle here also.” He sat down by the gate, and when a man came
out he stood up, opened his mouth, and pointed down it to show that
he wanted food. The man stared, and ran back up the one street of the
village shouting for the priest, who was a big, fat man dressed in
white, with a red and yellow mark on his forehead. The priest came to
the gate, and with him at least a hundred people, who stared and talked
and shouted and pointed at Mowgli.

“They have no manners, these Men Folk,” said Mowgli to himself. “Only
the gray ape would behave as they do.” So he threw back his long hair
and frowned at the crowd.

“What is there to be afraid of?” said the priest. “Look at the marks on
his arms and legs. They are the bites of wolves. He is but a wolf-child
run away from the jungle.”

Of course, in playing together, the cubs had often nipped Mowgli harder
than they intended, and there were white scars all over his arms and
legs. But he would have been the last person in the world to call these
bites, for he knew what real biting meant.

“Arre! Arre!” said two or three women together. “To be bitten by wolves,
poor child! He is a handsome boy. He has eyes like red fire. By my
honor, Messua, he is not unlike thy boy that was taken by the tiger.”

“Let me look,” said a woman with heavy copper rings on her wrists and
ankles, and she peered at Mowgli under the palm of her hand. “Indeed he
is not. He is thinner, but he has the very look of my boy.”

The priest was a clever man, and he knew that Messua was wife to the
richest villager in the place. So he looked up at the sky for a minute
and said solemnly: “What the jungle has taken the jungle has restored.
Take the boy into thy house, my sister, and forget not to honor the
priest who sees so far into the lives of men.”

“By the Bull that bought me,” said Mowgli to himself, “but all this
talking is like another looking-over by the Pack! Well, if I am a man, a
man I must become.”

The crowd parted as the woman beckoned Mowgli to her hut, where there
was a red lacquered bedstead, a great earthen grain chest with funny
raised patterns on it, half a dozen copper cooking pots, an image of a
Hindu god in a little alcove, and on the wall a real looking glass, such
as they sell at the country fairs.

She gave him a long drink of milk and some bread, and then she laid her
hand on his head and looked into his eyes; for she thought perhaps that
he might be her real son come back from the jungle where the tiger had
taken him. So she said, “Nathoo, O Nathoo!” Mowgli did not show that he
knew the name. “Dost thou not remember the day when I gave thee thy new
shoes?” She touched his foot, and it was almost as hard as horn. “No,”
 she said sorrowfully, “those feet have never worn shoes, but thou art
very like my Nathoo, and thou shalt be my son.”

Mowgli was uneasy, because he had never been under a roof before. But as
he looked at the thatch, he saw that he could tear it out any time if he
wanted to get away, and that the window had no fastenings. “What is the
good of a man,” he said to himself at last, “if he does not understand
man’s talk? Now I am as silly and dumb as a man would be with us in the
jungle. I must speak their talk.”

It was not for fun that he had learned while he was with the wolves to
imitate the challenge of bucks in the jungle and the grunt of the little
wild pig. So, as soon as Messua pronounced a word Mowgli would imitate
it almost perfectly, and before dark he had learned the names of many
things in the hut.

There was a difficulty at bedtime, because Mowgli would not sleep under
anything that looked so like a panther trap as that hut, and when they
shut the door he went through the window. “Give him his will,” said
Messua’s husband. “Remember he can never till now have slept on a bed.
If he is indeed sent in the place of our son he will not run away.”

So Mowgli stretched himself in some long, clean grass at the edge of
the field, but before he had closed his eyes a soft gray nose poked him
under the chin.

“Phew!” said Gray Brother (he was the eldest of Mother Wolf’s cubs).
“This is a poor reward for following thee twenty miles. Thou smellest
of wood smoke and cattle--altogether like a man already. Wake, Little
Brother; I bring news.”

“Are all well in the jungle?” said Mowgli, hugging him.

“All except the wolves that were burned with the Red Flower. Now,
listen. Shere Khan has gone away to hunt far off till his coat grows
again, for he is badly singed. When he returns he swears that he will
lay thy bones in the Waingunga.”

“There are two words to that. I also have made a little promise. But
news is always good. I am tired to-night,--very tired with new things,
Gray Brother,--but bring me the news always.”

“Thou wilt not forget that thou art a wolf? Men will not make thee
forget?” said Gray Brother anxiously.

“Never. I will always remember that I love thee and all in our cave. But
also I will always remember that I have been cast out of the Pack.”

“And that thou mayest be cast out of another pack. Men are only men,
Little Brother, and their talk is like the talk of frogs in a pond. When
I come down here again, I will wait for thee in the bamboos at the edge
of the grazing-ground.”

For three months after that night Mowgli hardly ever left the village
gate, he was so busy learning the ways and customs of men. First he had
to wear a cloth round him, which annoyed him horribly; and then he had
to learn about money, which he did not in the least understand, and
about plowing, of which he did not see the use. Then the little children
in the village made him very angry. Luckily, the Law of the Jungle had
taught him to keep his temper, for in the jungle life and food depend on
keeping your temper; but when they made fun of him because he would not
play games or fly kites, or because he mispronounced some word, only the
knowledge that it was unsportsmanlike to kill little naked cubs kept him
from picking them up and breaking them in two.

He did not know his own strength in the least. In the jungle he knew he
was weak compared with the beasts, but in the village people said that
he was as strong as a bull.

And Mowgli had not the faintest idea of the difference that caste makes
between man and man. When the potter’s donkey slipped in the clay pit,
Mowgli hauled it out by the tail, and helped to stack the pots for their
journey to the market at Khanhiwara. That was very shocking, too, for
the potter is a low-caste man, and his donkey is worse. When the priest
scolded him, Mowgli threatened to put him on the donkey too, and the
priest told Messua’s husband that Mowgli had better be set to work as
soon as possible; and the village head-man told Mowgli that he would
have to go out with the buffaloes next day, and herd them while they
grazed. No one was more pleased than Mowgli; and that night, because he
had been appointed a servant of the village, as it were, he went off
to a circle that met every evening on a masonry platform under a great
fig-tree. It was the village club, and the head-man and the watchman and
the barber, who knew all the gossip of the village, and old Buldeo, the
village hunter, who had a Tower musket, met and smoked. The monkeys
sat and talked in the upper branches, and there was a hole under the
platform where a cobra lived, and he had his little platter of milk
every night because he was sacred; and the old men sat around the tree
and talked, and pulled at the big huqas (the water-pipes) till far into
the night. They told wonderful tales of gods and men and ghosts; and
Buldeo told even more wonderful ones of the ways of beasts in the
jungle, till the eyes of the children sitting outside the circle bulged
out of their heads. Most of the tales were about animals, for the jungle
was always at their door. The deer and the wild pig grubbed up their
crops, and now and again the tiger carried off a man at twilight, within
sight of the village gates.

Mowgli, who naturally knew something about what they were talking of,
had to cover his face not to show that he was laughing, while Buldeo,
the Tower musket across his knees, climbed on from one wonderful story
to another, and Mowgli’s shoulders shook.

Buldeo was explaining how the tiger that had carried away Messua’s son
was a ghost-tiger, and his body was inhabited by the ghost of a wicked,
old money-lender, who had died some years ago. “And I know that this is
true,” he said, “because Purun Dass always limped from the blow that he
got in a riot when his account books were burned, and the tiger that I
speak of he limps, too, for the tracks of his pads are unequal.”

“True, true, that must be the truth,” said the gray-beards, nodding
together.

“Are all these tales such cobwebs and moon talk?” said Mowgli. “That
tiger limps because he was born lame, as everyone knows. To talk of the
soul of a money-lender in a beast that never had the courage of a jackal
is child’s talk.”

Buldeo was speechless with surprise for a moment, and the head-man
stared.

“Oho! It is the jungle brat, is it?” said Buldeo. “If thou art so
wise, better bring his hide to Khanhiwara, for the Government has set
a hundred rupees on his life. Better still, talk not when thy elders
speak.”

Mowgli rose to go. “All the evening I have lain here listening,” he
called back over his shoulder, “and, except once or twice, Buldeo has
not said one word of truth concerning the jungle, which is at his very
doors. How, then, shall I believe the tales of ghosts and gods and
goblins which he says he has seen?”

“It is full time that boy went to herding,” said the head-man, while
Buldeo puffed and snorted at Mowgli’s impertinence.

The custom of most Indian villages is for a few boys to take the cattle
and buffaloes out to graze in the early morning, and bring them back
at night. The very cattle that would trample a white man to death allow
themselves to be banged and bullied and shouted at by children that
hardly come up to their noses. So long as the boys keep with the herds
they are safe, for not even the tiger will charge a mob of cattle. But
if they straggle to pick flowers or hunt lizards, they are sometimes
carried off. Mowgli went through the village street in the dawn, sitting
on the back of Rama, the great herd bull. The slaty-blue buffaloes,
with their long, backward-sweeping horns and savage eyes, rose out their
byres, one by one, and followed him, and Mowgli made it very clear to
the children with him that he was the master. He beat the buffaloes with
a long, polished bamboo, and told Kamya, one of the boys, to graze the
cattle by themselves, while he went on with the buffaloes, and to be
very careful not to stray away from the herd.

An Indian grazing ground is all rocks and scrub and tussocks and little
ravines, among which the herds scatter and disappear. The buffaloes
generally keep to the pools and muddy places, where they lie wallowing
or basking in the warm mud for hours. Mowgli drove them on to the edge
of the plain where the Waingunga came out of the jungle; then he dropped
from Rama’s neck, trotted off to a bamboo clump, and found Gray Brother.
“Ah,” said Gray Brother, “I have waited here very many days. What is the
meaning of this cattle-herding work?”

“It is an order,” said Mowgli. “I am a village herd for a while. What
news of Shere Khan?”

“He has come back to this country, and has waited here a long time for
thee. Now he has gone off again, for the game is scarce. But he means to
kill thee.”

“Very good,” said Mowgli. “So long as he is away do thou or one of the
four brothers sit on that rock, so that I can see thee as I come out of
the village. When he comes back wait for me in the ravine by the dhak
tree in the center of the plain. We need not walk into Shere Khan’s
mouth.”

Then Mowgli picked out a shady place, and lay down and slept while
the buffaloes grazed round him. Herding in India is one of the laziest
things in the world. The cattle move and crunch, and lie down, and move
on again, and they do not even low. They only grunt, and the buffaloes
very seldom say anything, but get down into the muddy pools one after
another, and work their way into the mud till only their noses and
staring china-blue eyes show above the surface, and then they lie like
logs. The sun makes the rocks dance in the heat, and the herd children
hear one kite (never any more) whistling almost out of sight overhead,
and they know that if they died, or a cow died, that kite would sweep
down, and the next kite miles away would see him drop and follow, and
the next, and the next, and almost before they were dead there would be
a score of hungry kites come out of nowhere. Then they sleep and
wake and sleep again, and weave little baskets of dried grass and put
grasshoppers in them; or catch two praying mantises and make them fight;
or string a necklace of red and black jungle nuts; or watch a lizard
basking on a rock, or a snake hunting a frog near the wallows. Then they
sing long, long songs with odd native quavers at the end of them, and
the day seems longer than most people’s whole lives, and perhaps they
make a mud castle with mud figures of men and horses and buffaloes, and
put reeds into the men’s hands, and pretend that they are kings and the
figures are their armies, or that they are gods to be worshiped. Then
evening comes and the children call, and the buffaloes lumber up out of
the sticky mud with noises like gunshots going off one after the other,
and they all string across the gray plain back to the twinkling village
lights.

Day after day Mowgli would lead the buffaloes out to their wallows, and
day after day he would see Gray Brother’s back a mile and a half away
across the plain (so he knew that Shere Khan had not come back), and day
after day he would lie on the grass listening to the noises round him,
and dreaming of old days in the jungle. If Shere Khan had made a false
step with his lame paw up in the jungles by the Waingunga, Mowgli would
have heard him in those long, still mornings.

At last a day came when he did not see Gray Brother at the signal place,
and he laughed and headed the buffaloes for the ravine by the dhk tree,
which was all covered with golden-red flowers. There sat Gray Brother,
every bristle on his back lifted.

“He has hidden for a month to throw thee off thy guard. He crossed the
ranges last night with Tabaqui, hot-foot on thy trail,” said the Wolf,
panting.

Mowgli frowned. “I am not afraid of Shere Khan, but Tabaqui is very
cunning.”

“Have no fear,” said Gray Brother, licking his lips a little. “I met
Tabaqui in the dawn. Now he is telling all his wisdom to the kites, but
he told me everything before I broke his back. Shere Khan’s plan is to
wait for thee at the village gate this evening--for thee and for no one
else. He is lying up now, in the big dry ravine of the Waingunga.”

“Has he eaten today, or does he hunt empty?” said Mowgli, for the answer
meant life and death to him.

“He killed at dawn,--a pig,--and he has drunk too. Remember, Shere Khan
could never fast, even for the sake of revenge.”

“Oh! Fool, fool! What a cub’s cub it is! Eaten and drunk too, and he
thinks that I shall wait till he has slept! Now, where does he lie up?
If there were but ten of us we might pull him down as he lies. These
buffaloes will not charge unless they wind him, and I cannot speak their
language. Can we get behind his track so that they may smell it?”

“He swam far down the Waingunga to cut that off,” said Gray Brother.

“Tabaqui told him that, I know. He would never have thought of it
alone.” Mowgli stood with his finger in his mouth, thinking. “The big
ravine of the Waingunga. That opens out on the plain not half a mile
from here. I can take the herd round through the jungle to the head of
the ravine and then sweep down--but he would slink out at the foot. We
must block that end. Gray Brother, canst thou cut the herd in two for
me?”

“Not I, perhaps--but I have brought a wise helper.” Gray Brother trotted
off and dropped into a hole. Then there lifted up a huge gray head that
Mowgli knew well, and the hot air was filled with the most desolate cry
of all the jungle--the hunting howl of a wolf at midday.

“Akela! Akela!” said Mowgli, clapping his hands. “I might have known
that thou wouldst not forget me. We have a big work in hand. Cut the
herd in two, Akela. Keep the cows and calves together, and the bulls and
the plow buffaloes by themselves.”

The two wolves ran, ladies’-chain fashion, in and out of the herd, which
snorted and threw up its head, and separated into two clumps. In one,
the cow-buffaloes stood with their calves in the center, and glared
and pawed, ready, if a wolf would only stay still, to charge down and
trample the life out of him. In the other, the bulls and the young bulls
snorted and stamped, but though they looked more imposing they were much
less dangerous, for they had no calves to protect. No six men could have
divided the herd so neatly.

“What orders!” panted Akela. “They are trying to join again.”

Mowgli slipped on to Rama’s back. “Drive the bulls away to the left,
Akela. Gray Brother, when we are gone, hold the cows together, and drive
them into the foot of the ravine.”

“How far?” said Gray Brother, panting and snapping.

“Till the sides are higher than Shere Khan can jump,” shouted Mowgli.
“Keep them there till we come down.” The bulls swept off as Akela bayed,
and Gray Brother stopped in front of the cows. They charged down on him,
and he ran just before them to the foot of the ravine, as Akela drove
the bulls far to the left.

“Well done! Another charge and they are fairly started. Careful,
now--careful, Akela. A snap too much and the bulls will charge. Hujah!
This is wilder work than driving black-buck. Didst thou think these
creatures could move so swiftly?” Mowgli called.

“I have--have hunted these too in my time,” gasped Akela in the dust.
“Shall I turn them into the jungle?”

“Ay! Turn. Swiftly turn them! Rama is mad with rage. Oh, if I could only
tell him what I need of him to-day.”

The bulls were turned, to the right this time, and crashed into the
standing thicket. The other herd children, watching with the cattle half
a mile away, hurried to the village as fast as their legs could carry
them, crying that the buffaloes had gone mad and run away.

But Mowgli’s plan was simple enough. All he wanted to do was to make a
big circle uphill and get at the head of the ravine, and then take the
bulls down it and catch Shere Khan between the bulls and the cows; for
he knew that after a meal and a full drink Shere Khan would not be in
any condition to fight or to clamber up the sides of the ravine. He was
soothing the buffaloes now by voice, and Akela had dropped far to the
rear, only whimpering once or twice to hurry the rear-guard. It was a
long, long circle, for they did not wish to get too near the ravine and
give Shere Khan warning. At last Mowgli rounded up the bewildered herd
at the head of the ravine on a grassy patch that sloped steeply down to
the ravine itself. From that height you could see across the tops of the
trees down to the plain below; but what Mowgli looked at was the sides
of the ravine, and he saw with a great deal of satisfaction that they
ran nearly straight up and down, while the vines and creepers that hung
over them would give no foothold to a tiger who wanted to get out.

“Let them breathe, Akela,” he said, holding up his hand. “They have not
winded him yet. Let them breathe. I must tell Shere Khan who comes. We
have him in the trap.”

He put his hands to his mouth and shouted down the ravine--it was almost
like shouting down a tunnel--and the echoes jumped from rock to rock.

After a long time there came back the drawling, sleepy snarl of a
full-fed tiger just wakened.

“Who calls?” said Shere Khan, and a splendid peacock fluttered up out of
the ravine screeching.

“I, Mowgli. Cattle thief, it is time to come to the Council Rock!
Down--hurry them down, Akela! Down, Rama, down!”

The herd paused for an instant at the edge of the slope, but Akela gave
tongue in the full hunting-yell, and they pitched over one after the
other, just as steamers shoot rapids, the sand and stones spurting up
round them. Once started, there was no chance of stopping, and before
they were fairly in the bed of the ravine Rama winded Shere Khan and
bellowed.

“Ha! Ha!” said Mowgli, on his back. “Now thou knowest!” and the torrent
of black horns, foaming muzzles, and staring eyes whirled down the
ravine just as boulders go down in floodtime; the weaker buffaloes being
shouldered out to the sides of the ravine where they tore through the
creepers. They knew what the business was before them--the terrible
charge of the buffalo herd against which no tiger can hope to stand.
Shere Khan heard the thunder of their hoofs, picked himself up, and
lumbered down the ravine, looking from side to side for some way of
escape, but the walls of the ravine were straight and he had to hold on,
heavy with his dinner and his drink, willing to do anything rather than
fight. The herd splashed through the pool he had just left, bellowing
till the narrow cut rang. Mowgli heard an answering bellow from the foot
of the ravine, saw Shere Khan turn (the tiger knew if the worst came
to the worst it was better to meet the bulls than the cows with their
calves), and then Rama tripped, stumbled, and went on again over
something soft, and, with the bulls at his heels, crashed full into the
other herd, while the weaker buffaloes were lifted clean off their feet
by the shock of the meeting. That charge carried both herds out into the
plain, goring and stamping and snorting. Mowgli watched his time, and
slipped off Rama’s neck, laying about him right and left with his stick.

“Quick, Akela! Break them up. Scatter them, or they will be fighting one
another. Drive them away, Akela. Hai, Rama! Hai, hai, hai! my children.
Softly now, softly! It is all over.”

Akela and Gray Brother ran to and fro nipping the buffaloes’ legs,
and though the herd wheeled once to charge up the ravine again, Mowgli
managed to turn Rama, and the others followed him to the wallows.

Shere Khan needed no more trampling. He was dead, and the kites were
coming for him already.

“Brothers, that was a dog’s death,” said Mowgli, feeling for the knife
he always carried in a sheath round his neck now that he lived with men.
“But he would never have shown fight. His hide will look well on the
Council Rock. We must get to work swiftly.”

A boy trained among men would never have dreamed of skinning a ten-foot
tiger alone, but Mowgli knew better than anyone else how an animal’s
skin is fitted on, and how it can be taken off. But it was hard work,
and Mowgli slashed and tore and grunted for an hour, while the wolves
lolled out their tongues, or came forward and tugged as he ordered them.
Presently a hand fell on his shoulder, and looking up he saw Buldeo with
the Tower musket. The children had told the village about the buffalo
stampede, and Buldeo went out angrily, only too anxious to correct
Mowgli for not taking better care of the herd. The wolves dropped out of
sight as soon as they saw the man coming.

“What is this folly?” said Buldeo angrily. “To think that thou canst
skin a tiger! Where did the buffaloes kill him? It is the Lame Tiger
too, and there is a hundred rupees on his head. Well, well, we will
overlook thy letting the herd run off, and perhaps I will give thee one
of the rupees of the reward when I have taken the skin to Khanhiwara.”
 He fumbled in his waist cloth for flint and steel, and stooped down to
singe Shere Khan’s whiskers. Most native hunters always singe a tiger’s
whiskers to prevent his ghost from haunting them.

“Hum!” said Mowgli, half to himself as he ripped back the skin of a
forepaw. “So thou wilt take the hide to Khanhiwara for the reward, and
perhaps give me one rupee? Now it is in my mind that I need the skin for
my own use. Heh! Old man, take away that fire!”

“What talk is this to the chief hunter of the village? Thy luck and the
stupidity of thy buffaloes have helped thee to this kill. The tiger has
just fed, or he would have gone twenty miles by this time. Thou canst
not even skin him properly, little beggar brat, and forsooth I, Buldeo,
must be told not to singe his whiskers. Mowgli, I will not give thee one
anna of the reward, but only a very big beating. Leave the carcass!”

“By the Bull that bought me,” said Mowgli, who was trying to get at the
shoulder, “must I stay babbling to an old ape all noon? Here, Akela,
this man plagues me.”

Buldeo, who was still stooping over Shere Khan’s head, found himself
sprawling on the grass, with a gray wolf standing over him, while Mowgli
went on skinning as though he were alone in all India.

“Ye-es,” he said, between his teeth. “Thou art altogether right, Buldeo.
Thou wilt never give me one anna of the reward. There is an old war
between this lame tiger and myself--a very old war, and--I have won.”

To do Buldeo justice, if he had been ten years younger he would have
taken his chance with Akela had he met the wolf in the woods, but a wolf
who obeyed the orders of this boy who had private wars with man-eating
tigers was not a common animal. It was sorcery, magic of the worst kind,
thought Buldeo, and he wondered whether the amulet round his neck would
protect him. He lay as still as still, expecting every minute to see
Mowgli turn into a tiger too.

“Maharaj! Great King,” he said at last in a husky whisper.

“Yes,” said Mowgli, without turning his head, chuckling a little.

“I am an old man. I did not know that thou wast anything more than a
herdsboy. May I rise up and go away, or will thy servant tear me to
pieces?”

“Go, and peace go with thee. Only, another time do not meddle with my
game. Let him go, Akela.”

Buldeo hobbled away to the village as fast as he could, looking back
over his shoulder in case Mowgli should change into something terrible.
When he got to the village he told a tale of magic and enchantment and
sorcery that made the priest look very grave.

Mowgli went on with his work, but it was nearly twilight before he and
the wolves had drawn the great gay skin clear of the body.

“Now we must hide this and take the buffaloes home! Help me to herd
them, Akela.”

The herd rounded up in the misty twilight, and when they got near the
village Mowgli saw lights, and heard the conches and bells in the temple
blowing and banging. Half the village seemed to be waiting for him
by the gate. “That is because I have killed Shere Khan,” he said
to himself. But a shower of stones whistled about his ears, and the
villagers shouted: “Sorcerer! Wolf’s brat! Jungle demon! Go away! Get
hence quickly or the priest will turn thee into a wolf again. Shoot,
Buldeo, shoot!”

The old Tower musket went off with a bang, and a young buffalo bellowed
in pain.

“More sorcery!” shouted the villagers. “He can turn bullets. Buldeo,
that was thy buffalo.”

“Now what is this?” said Mowgli, bewildered, as the stones flew thicker.

“They are not unlike the Pack, these brothers of thine,” said Akela,
sitting down composedly. “It is in my head that, if bullets mean
anything, they would cast thee out.”

“Wolf! Wolf’s cub! Go away!” shouted the priest, waving a sprig of the
sacred tulsi plant.

“Again? Last time it was because I was a man. This time it is because I
am a wolf. Let us go, Akela.”

A woman--it was Messua--ran across to the herd, and cried: “Oh, my son,
my son! They say thou art a sorcerer who can turn himself into a beast
at will. I do not believe, but go away or they will kill thee. Buldeo
says thou art a wizard, but I know thou hast avenged Nathoo’s death.”

“Come back, Messua!” shouted the crowd. “Come back, or we will stone
thee.”

Mowgli laughed a little short ugly laugh, for a stone had hit him in
the mouth. “Run back, Messua. This is one of the foolish tales they tell
under the big tree at dusk. I have at least paid for thy son’s life.
Farewell; and run quickly, for I shall send the herd in more swiftly
than their brickbats. I am no wizard, Messua. Farewell!”

“Now, once more, Akela,” he cried. “Bring the herd in.”

The buffaloes were anxious enough to get to the village. They hardly
needed Akela’s yell, but charged through the gate like a whirlwind,
scattering the crowd right and left.

“Keep count!” shouted Mowgli scornfully. “It may be that I have stolen
one of them. Keep count, for I will do your herding no more. Fare you
well, children of men, and thank Messua that I do not come in with my
wolves and hunt you up and down your street.”

He turned on his heel and walked away with the Lone Wolf, and as he
looked up at the stars he felt happy. “No more sleeping in traps for me,
Akela. Let us get Shere Khan’s skin and go away. No, we will not hurt
the village, for Messua was kind to me.”

When the moon rose over the plain, making it look all milky, the
horrified villagers saw Mowgli, with two wolves at his heels and a
bundle on his head, trotting across at the steady wolf’s trot that eats
up the long miles like fire. Then they banged the temple bells and blew
the conches louder than ever. And Messua cried, and Buldeo embroidered
the story of his adventures in the jungle, till he ended by saying that
Akela stood up on his hind legs and talked like a man.

The moon was just going down when Mowgli and the two wolves came to the
hill of the Council Rock, and they stopped at Mother Wolf’s cave.

“They have cast me out from the Man-Pack, Mother,” shouted Mowgli, “but
I come with the hide of Shere Khan to keep my word.”

Mother Wolf walked stiffly from the cave with the cubs behind her, and
her eyes glowed as she saw the skin.

“I told him on that day, when he crammed his head and shoulders into
this cave, hunting for thy life, Little Frog--I told him that the hunter
would be the hunted. It is well done.”

“Little Brother, it is well done,” said a deep voice in the thicket.
“We were lonely in the jungle without thee,” and Bagheera came running
to Mowgli’s bare feet. They clambered up the Council Rock together, and
Mowgli spread the skin out on the flat stone where Akela used to sit,
and pegged it down with four slivers of bamboo, and Akela lay down upon
it, and called the old call to the Council, “Look--look well, O Wolves,”
 exactly as he had called when Mowgli was first brought there.

Ever since Akela had been deposed, the Pack had been without a leader,
hunting and fighting at their own pleasure. But they answered the call
from habit; and some of them were lame from the traps they had fallen
into, and some limped from shot wounds, and some were mangy from eating
bad food, and many were missing. But they came to the Council Rock, all
that were left of them, and saw Shere Khan’s striped hide on the rock,
and the huge claws dangling at the end of the empty dangling feet. It
was then that Mowgli made up a song that came up into his throat all
by itself, and he shouted it aloud, leaping up and down on the rattling
skin, and beating time with his heels till he had no more breath left,
while Gray Brother and Akela howled between the verses.

“Look well, O Wolves. Have I kept my word?” said Mowgli. And the wolves
bayed “Yes,” and one tattered wolf howled:

“Lead us again, O Akela. Lead us again, O Man-cub, for we be sick of
this lawlessness, and we would be the Free People once more.”

“Nay,” purred Bagheera, “that may not be. When ye are full-fed, the
madness may come upon you again. Not for nothing are ye called the Free
People. Ye fought for freedom, and it is yours. Eat it, O Wolves.”

“Man-Pack and Wolf-Pack have cast me out,” said Mowgli. “Now I will hunt
alone in the jungle.”

“And we will hunt with thee,” said the four cubs.

So Mowgli went away and hunted with the four cubs in the jungle from
that day on. But he was not always alone, because, years afterward, he
became a man and married.

But that is a story for grown-ups.




Mowgli’s Song

     THAT HE SANG AT THE COUNCIL ROCK WHEN HE
     DANCED ON SHERE KHAN’S HIDE

     The Song of Mowgli--I, Mowgli, am singing.  Let the jungle
        listen to the things I have done.

     Shere Khan said he would kill--would kill!  At the gates in the
        twilight he would kill Mowgli, the Frog!

     He ate and he drank.  Drink deep, Shere Khan, for when wilt thou
        drink again?  Sleep and dream of the kill.

     I am alone on the grazing-grounds.  Gray Brother, come to me!
        Come to me, Lone Wolf, for there is big game afoot!

     Bring up the great bull buffaloes, the blue-skinned herd bulls
        with the angry eyes.  Drive them to and fro as I order.

     Sleepest thou still, Shere Khan?  Wake, oh, wake!  Here come I,
        and the bulls are behind.

     Rama, the King of the Buffaloes, stamped with his foot.  Waters of
        the Waingunga, whither went Shere Khan?

     He is not Ikki to dig holes, nor Mao, the Peacock, that he should
        fly.  He is not Mang the Bat, to hang in the branches.  Little
        bamboos that creak together, tell me where he ran?

     Ow!  He is there.  Ahoo!  He is there.  Under the feet of Rama
        lies the Lame One!  Up, Shere Khan!

     Up and kill!  Here is meat; break the necks of the bulls!

     Hsh!  He is asleep.  We will not wake him, for his strength is
        very great.  The kites have come down to see it.  The black
        ants have come up to know it.  There is a great assembly in his
        honor.

     Alala!  I have no cloth to wrap me.  The kites will see that I am
        naked.  I am ashamed to meet all these people.

     Lend me thy coat, Shere Khan.  Lend me thy gay striped coat that I
        may go to the Council Rock.

     By the Bull that bought me I made a promise--a little promise.
        Only thy coat is lacking before I keep my word.

     With the knife, with the knife that men use, with the knife of the
        hunter, I will stoop down for my gift.

     Waters of the Waingunga, Shere Khan gives me his coat for the love
        that he bears me.  Pull, Gray Brother!  Pull, Akela!  Heavy is
        the hide of Shere Khan.

     The Man Pack are angry.  They throw stones and talk child’s talk.
        My mouth is bleeding.  Let me run away.

     Through the night, through the hot night, run swiftly with me, my
        brothers.  We will leave the lights of the village and go to
        the low moon.

     Waters of the Waingunga, the Man-Pack have cast me out.  I did
        them no harm, but they were afraid of me.  Why?

     Wolf Pack, ye have cast me out too.  The jungle is shut to me and
        the village gates are shut.  Why?

     As Mang flies between the beasts and birds, so fly I between the
        village and the jungle.  Why?

     I dance on the hide of Shere Khan, but my heart is very heavy.  My
        mouth is cut and wounded with the stones from the village, but
        my heart is very light, because I have come back to the jungle.
        Why?

     These two things fight together in me as the snakes fight in the
        spring.  The water comes out of my eyes; yet I laugh while it
        falls.  Why?

     I am two Mowglis, but the hide of Shere Khan is under my feet.

     All the jungle knows that I have killed Shere Khan.  Look--look
        well, O Wolves!

     Ahae!  My heart is heavy with the things that I do not understand.




The White Seal

     Oh! hush thee, my baby, the night is behind us,
        And black are the waters that sparkled so green.
     The moon, o’er the combers, looks downward to find us
        At rest in the hollows that rustle between.
     Where billow meets billow, then soft be thy pillow,
        Ah, weary wee flipperling, curl at thy ease!
     The storm shall not wake thee, nor shark overtake thee,
        Asleep in the arms of the slow-swinging seas!

                                              Seal Lullaby


All these things happened several years ago at a place called
Novastoshnah, or North East Point, on the Island of St. Paul, away and
away in the Bering Sea. Limmershin, the Winter Wren, told me the tale
when he was blown on to the rigging of a steamer going to Japan, and I
took him down into my cabin and warmed and fed him for a couple of days
till he was fit to fly back to St. Paul’s again. Limmershin is a very
quaint little bird, but he knows how to tell the truth.

Nobody comes to Novastoshnah except on business, and the only people
who have regular business there are the seals. They come in the summer
months by hundreds and hundreds of thousands out of the cold gray sea.
For Novastoshnah Beach has the finest accommodation for seals of any
place in all the world.

Sea Catch knew that, and every spring would swim from whatever place
he happened to be in--would swim like a torpedo-boat straight for
Novastoshnah and spend a month fighting with his companions for a good
place on the rocks, as close to the sea as possible. Sea Catch was
fifteen years old, a huge gray fur seal with almost a mane on his
shoulders, and long, wicked dog teeth. When he heaved himself up on his
front flippers he stood more than four feet clear of the ground, and his
weight, if anyone had been bold enough to weigh him, was nearly seven
hundred pounds. He was scarred all over with the marks of savage fights,
but he was always ready for just one fight more. He would put his head
on one side, as though he were afraid to look his enemy in the face;
then he would shoot it out like lightning, and when the big teeth were
firmly fixed on the other seal’s neck, the other seal might get away if
he could, but Sea Catch would not help him.

Yet Sea Catch never chased a beaten seal, for that was against the Rules
of the Beach. He only wanted room by the sea for his nursery. But as
there were forty or fifty thousand other seals hunting for the same
thing each spring, the whistling, bellowing, roaring, and blowing on the
beach was something frightful.

From a little hill called Hutchinson’s Hill, you could look over three
and a half miles of ground covered with fighting seals; and the surf was
dotted all over with the heads of seals hurrying to land and begin their
share of the fighting. They fought in the breakers, they fought in the
sand, and they fought on the smooth-worn basalt rocks of the nurseries,
for they were just as stupid and unaccommodating as men. Their wives
never came to the island until late in May or early in June, for they
did not care to be torn to pieces; and the young two-, three-, and
four-year-old seals who had not begun housekeeping went inland about
half a mile through the ranks of the fighters and played about on the
sand dunes in droves and legions, and rubbed off every single green
thing that grew. They were called the holluschickie--the bachelors--and
there were perhaps two or three hundred thousand of them at Novastoshnah
alone.

Sea Catch had just finished his forty-fifth fight one spring when
Matkah, his soft, sleek, gentle-eyed wife, came up out of the sea,
and he caught her by the scruff of the neck and dumped her down on his
reservation, saying gruffly: “Late as usual. Where have you been?”

It was not the fashion for Sea Catch to eat anything during the four
months he stayed on the beaches, and so his temper was generally bad.
Matkah knew better than to answer back. She looked round and cooed: “How
thoughtful of you. You’ve taken the old place again.”

“I should think I had,” said Sea Catch. “Look at me!”

He was scratched and bleeding in twenty places; one eye was almost out,
and his sides were torn to ribbons.

“Oh, you men, you men!” Matkah said, fanning herself with her hind
flipper. “Why can’t you be sensible and settle your places quietly? You
look as though you had been fighting with the Killer Whale.”

“I haven’t been doing anything but fight since the middle of May. The
beach is disgracefully crowded this season. I’ve met at least a hundred
seals from Lukannon Beach, house hunting. Why can’t people stay where
they belong?”

“I’ve often thought we should be much happier if we hauled out at Otter
Island instead of this crowded place,” said Matkah.

“Bah! Only the holluschickie go to Otter Island. If we went there they
would say we were afraid. We must preserve appearances, my dear.”

Sea Catch sunk his head proudly between his fat shoulders and pretended
to go to sleep for a few minutes, but all the time he was keeping a
sharp lookout for a fight. Now that all the seals and their wives were
on the land, you could hear their clamor miles out to sea above the
loudest gales. At the lowest counting there were over a million seals
on the beach--old seals, mother seals, tiny babies, and holluschickie,
fighting, scuffling, bleating, crawling, and playing together--going
down to the sea and coming up from it in gangs and regiments, lying
over every foot of ground as far as the eye could reach, and skirmishing
about in brigades through the fog. It is nearly always foggy at
Novastoshnah, except when the sun comes out and makes everything look
all pearly and rainbow-colored for a little while.

Kotick, Matkah’s baby, was born in the middle of that confusion, and he
was all head and shoulders, with pale, watery blue eyes, as tiny seals
must be, but there was something about his coat that made his mother
look at him very closely.

“Sea Catch,” she said, at last, “our baby’s going to be white!”

“Empty clam-shells and dry seaweed!” snorted Sea Catch. “There never has
been such a thing in the world as a white seal.”

“I can’t help that,” said Matkah; “there’s going to be now.” And she
sang the low, crooning seal song that all the mother seals sing to their
babies:

     You mustn’t swim till you’re six weeks old,
        Or your head will be sunk by your heels;
     And summer gales and Killer Whales
        Are bad for baby seals.

     Are bad for baby seals, dear rat,
        As bad as bad can be;
     But splash and grow strong,
     And you can’t be wrong.
        Child of the Open Sea!

Of course the little fellow did not understand the words at first. He
paddled and scrambled about by his mother’s side, and learned to scuffle
out of the way when his father was fighting with another seal, and the
two rolled and roared up and down the slippery rocks. Matkah used to go
to sea to get things to eat, and the baby was fed only once in two days,
but then he ate all he could and throve upon it.

The first thing he did was to crawl inland, and there he met tens
of thousands of babies of his own age, and they played together like
puppies, went to sleep on the clean sand, and played again. The old
people in the nurseries took no notice of them, and the holluschickie
kept to their own grounds, and the babies had a beautiful playtime.

When Matkah came back from her deep-sea fishing she would go straight
to their playground and call as a sheep calls for a lamb, and wait until
she heard Kotick bleat. Then she would take the straightest of straight
lines in his direction, striking out with her fore flippers and knocking
the youngsters head over heels right and left. There were always a few
hundred mothers hunting for their children through the playgrounds, and
the babies were kept lively. But, as Matkah told Kotick, “So long as you
don’t lie in muddy water and get mange, or rub the hard sand into a cut
or scratch, and so long as you never go swimming when there is a heavy
sea, nothing will hurt you here.”

Little seals can no more swim than little children, but they are unhappy
till they learn. The first time that Kotick went down to the sea a wave
carried him out beyond his depth, and his big head sank and his little
hind flippers flew up exactly as his mother had told him in the song,
and if the next wave had not thrown him back again he would have
drowned.

After that, he learned to lie in a beach pool and let the wash of the
waves just cover him and lift him up while he paddled, but he always
kept his eye open for big waves that might hurt. He was two weeks
learning to use his flippers; and all that while he floundered in and
out of the water, and coughed and grunted and crawled up the beach and
took catnaps on the sand, and went back again, until at last he found
that he truly belonged to the water.

Then you can imagine the times that he had with his companions, ducking
under the rollers; or coming in on top of a comber and landing with a
swash and a splutter as the big wave went whirling far up the beach; or
standing up on his tail and scratching his head as the old people did;
or playing “I’m the King of the Castle” on slippery, weedy rocks that
just stuck out of the wash. Now and then he would see a thin fin, like
a big shark’s fin, drifting along close to shore, and he knew that that
was the Killer Whale, the Grampus, who eats young seals when he can get
them; and Kotick would head for the beach like an arrow, and the fin
would jig off slowly, as if it were looking for nothing at all.

Late in October the seals began to leave St. Paul’s for the deep sea, by
families and tribes, and there was no more fighting over the nurseries,
and the holluschickie played anywhere they liked. “Next year,” said
Matkah to Kotick, “you will be a holluschickie; but this year you must
learn how to catch fish.”

They set out together across the Pacific, and Matkah showed Kotick how
to sleep on his back with his flippers tucked down by his side and his
little nose just out of the water. No cradle is so comfortable as the
long, rocking swell of the Pacific. When Kotick felt his skin tingle all
over, Matkah told him he was learning the “feel of the water,” and that
tingly, prickly feelings meant bad weather coming, and he must swim hard
and get away.

“In a little time,” she said, “you’ll know where to swim to, but just
now we’ll follow Sea Pig, the Porpoise, for he is very wise.” A school
of porpoises were ducking and tearing through the water, and little
Kotick followed them as fast as he could. “How do you know where to go
to?” he panted. The leader of the school rolled his white eye and ducked
under. “My tail tingles, youngster,” he said. “That means there’s a gale
behind me. Come along! When you’re south of the Sticky Water [he meant
the Equator] and your tail tingles, that means there’s a gale in front
of you and you must head north. Come along! The water feels bad here.”

This was one of very many things that Kotick learned, and he was always
learning. Matkah taught him to follow the cod and the halibut along the
under-sea banks and wrench the rockling out of his hole among the weeds;
how to skirt the wrecks lying a hundred fathoms below water and dart
like a rifle bullet in at one porthole and out at another as the fishes
ran; how to dance on the top of the waves when the lightning was racing
all over the sky, and wave his flipper politely to the stumpy-tailed
Albatross and the Man-of-war Hawk as they went down the wind; how to
jump three or four feet clear of the water like a dolphin, flippers
close to the side and tail curved; to leave the flying fish alone
because they are all bony; to take the shoulder-piece out of a cod at
full speed ten fathoms deep, and never to stop and look at a boat or a
ship, but particularly a row-boat. At the end of six months what Kotick
did not know about deep-sea fishing was not worth the knowing. And all
that time he never set flipper on dry ground.

One day, however, as he was lying half asleep in the warm water
somewhere off the Island of Juan Fernandez, he felt faint and lazy all
over, just as human people do when the spring is in their legs, and he
remembered the good firm beaches of Novastoshnah seven thousand miles
away, the games his companions played, the smell of the seaweed, the
seal roar, and the fighting. That very minute he turned north, swimming
steadily, and as he went on he met scores of his mates, all bound for
the same place, and they said: “Greeting, Kotick! This year we are
all holluschickie, and we can dance the Fire-dance in the breakers off
Lukannon and play on the new grass. But where did you get that coat?”

Kotick’s fur was almost pure white now, and though he felt very proud of
it, he only said, “Swim quickly! My bones are aching for the land.” And
so they all came to the beaches where they had been born, and heard the
old seals, their fathers, fighting in the rolling mist.

That night Kotick danced the Fire-dance with the yearling seals. The sea
is full of fire on summer nights all the way down from Novastoshnah to
Lukannon, and each seal leaves a wake like burning oil behind him and a
flaming flash when he jumps, and the waves break in great phosphorescent
streaks and swirls. Then they went inland to the holluschickie grounds
and rolled up and down in the new wild wheat and told stories of what
they had done while they had been at sea. They talked about the Pacific
as boys would talk about a wood that they had been nutting in, and if
anyone had understood them he could have gone away and made such a chart
of that ocean as never was. The three- and four-year-old holluschickie
romped down from Hutchinson’s Hill crying: “Out of the way, youngsters!
The sea is deep and you don’t know all that’s in it yet. Wait till
you’ve rounded the Horn. Hi, you yearling, where did you get that white
coat?”

“I didn’t get it,” said Kotick. “It grew.” And just as he was going to
roll the speaker over, a couple of black-haired men with flat red faces
came from behind a sand dune, and Kotick, who had never seen a man
before, coughed and lowered his head. The holluschickie just bundled off
a few yards and sat staring stupidly. The men were no less than Kerick
Booterin, the chief of the seal-hunters on the island, and Patalamon,
his son. They came from the little village not half a mile from the sea
nurseries, and they were deciding what seals they would drive up to the
killing pens--for the seals were driven just like sheep--to be turned
into seal-skin jackets later on.

“Ho!” said Patalamon. “Look! There’s a white seal!”

Kerick Booterin turned nearly white under his oil and smoke, for he was
an Aleut, and Aleuts are not clean people. Then he began to mutter a
prayer. “Don’t touch him, Patalamon. There has never been a white seal
since--since I was born. Perhaps it is old Zaharrof’s ghost. He was lost
last year in the big gale.”

“I’m not going near him,” said Patalamon. “He’s unlucky. Do you really
think he is old Zaharrof come back? I owe him for some gulls’ eggs.”

“Don’t look at him,” said Kerick. “Head off that drove of
four-year-olds. The men ought to skin two hundred to-day, but it’s the
beginning of the season and they are new to the work. A hundred will do.
Quick!”

Patalamon rattled a pair of seal’s shoulder bones in front of a herd
of holluschickie and they stopped dead, puffing and blowing. Then he
stepped near and the seals began to move, and Kerick headed them inland,
and they never tried to get back to their companions. Hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of seals watched them being driven, but they went
on playing just the same. Kotick was the only one who asked questions,
and none of his companions could tell him anything, except that the
men always drove seals in that way for six weeks or two months of every
year.

“I am going to follow,” he said, and his eyes nearly popped out of his
head as he shuffled along in the wake of the herd.

“The white seal is coming after us,” cried Patalamon. “That’s the first
time a seal has ever come to the killing-grounds alone.”

“Hsh! Don’t look behind you,” said Kerick. “It is Zaharrof’s ghost! I
must speak to the priest about this.”

The distance to the killing-grounds was only half a mile, but it took an
hour to cover, because if the seals went too fast Kerick knew that they
would get heated and then their fur would come off in patches when they
were skinned. So they went on very slowly, past Sea Lion’s Neck, past
Webster House, till they came to the Salt House just beyond the sight
of the seals on the beach. Kotick followed, panting and wondering.
He thought that he was at the world’s end, but the roar of the seal
nurseries behind him sounded as loud as the roar of a train in a tunnel.
Then Kerick sat down on the moss and pulled out a heavy pewter watch
and let the drove cool off for thirty minutes, and Kotick could hear the
fog-dew dripping off the brim of his cap. Then ten or twelve men, each
with an iron-bound club three or four feet long, came up, and Kerick
pointed out one or two of the drove that were bitten by their companions
or too hot, and the men kicked those aside with their heavy boots made
of the skin of a walrus’s throat, and then Kerick said, “Let go!” and
then the men clubbed the seals on the head as fast as they could.

Ten minutes later little Kotick did not recognize his friends any more,
for their skins were ripped off from the nose to the hind flippers,
whipped off and thrown down on the ground in a pile. That was enough
for Kotick. He turned and galloped (a seal can gallop very swiftly for
a short time) back to the sea; his little new mustache bristling with
horror. At Sea Lion’s Neck, where the great sea lions sit on the edge
of the surf, he flung himself flipper-overhead into the cool water and
rocked there, gasping miserably. “What’s here?” said a sea lion gruffly,
for as a rule the sea lions keep themselves to themselves.

“Scoochnie! Ochen scoochnie!” (“I’m lonesome, very lonesome!”) said
Kotick. “They’re killing all the holluschickie on all the beaches!”

The Sea Lion turned his head inshore. “Nonsense!” he said. “Your
friends are making as much noise as ever. You must have seen old Kerick
polishing off a drove. He’s done that for thirty years.”

“It’s horrible,” said Kotick, backing water as a wave went over him, and
steadying himself with a screw stroke of his flippers that brought him
all standing within three inches of a jagged edge of rock.

“Well done for a yearling!” said the Sea Lion, who could appreciate good
swimming. “I suppose it is rather awful from your way of looking at it,
but if you seals will come here year after year, of course the men get
to know of it, and unless you can find an island where no men ever come
you will always be driven.”

“Isn’t there any such island?” began Kotick.

“I’ve followed the poltoos [the halibut] for twenty years, and I can’t
say I’ve found it yet. But look here--you seem to have a fondness for
talking to your betters--suppose you go to Walrus Islet and talk to
Sea Vitch. He may know something. Don’t flounce off like that. It’s a
six-mile swim, and if I were you I should haul out and take a nap first,
little one.”

Kotick thought that that was good advice, so he swam round to his own
beach, hauled out, and slept for half an hour, twitching all over, as
seals will. Then he headed straight for Walrus Islet, a little low sheet
of rocky island almost due northeast from Novastoshnah, all ledges and
rock and gulls’ nests, where the walrus herded by themselves.

He landed close to old Sea Vitch--the big, ugly, bloated, pimpled,
fat-necked, long-tusked walrus of the North Pacific, who has no manners
except when he is asleep--as he was then, with his hind flippers half in
and half out of the surf.

“Wake up!” barked Kotick, for the gulls were making a great noise.

“Hah! Ho! Hmph! What’s that?” said Sea Vitch, and he struck the next
walrus a blow with his tusks and waked him up, and the next struck the
next, and so on till they were all awake and staring in every direction
but the right one.

“Hi! It’s me,” said Kotick, bobbing in the surf and looking like a
little white slug.

“Well! May I be--skinned!” said Sea Vitch, and they all looked at Kotick
as you can fancy a club full of drowsy old gentlemen would look at a
little boy. Kotick did not care to hear any more about skinning just
then; he had seen enough of it. So he called out: “Isn’t there any place
for seals to go where men don’t ever come?”

“Go and find out,” said Sea Vitch, shutting his eyes. “Run away. We’re
busy here.”

Kotick made his dolphin-jump in the air and shouted as loud as he could:
“Clam-eater! Clam-eater!” He knew that Sea Vitch never caught a fish in
his life but always rooted for clams and seaweed; though he pretended to
be a very terrible person. Naturally the Chickies and the Gooverooskies
and the Epatkas--the Burgomaster Gulls and the Kittiwakes and the
Puffins, who are always looking for a chance to be rude, took up the
cry, and--so Limmershin told me--for nearly five minutes you could not
have heard a gun fired on Walrus Islet. All the population was yelling
and screaming “Clam-eater! Stareek [old man]!” while Sea Vitch rolled
from side to side grunting and coughing.

“Now will you tell?” said Kotick, all out of breath.

“Go and ask Sea Cow,” said Sea Vitch. “If he is living still, he’ll be
able to tell you.”

“How shall I know Sea Cow when I meet him?” said Kotick, sheering off.

“He’s the only thing in the sea uglier than Sea Vitch,” screamed a
Burgomaster gull, wheeling under Sea Vitch’s nose. “Uglier, and with
worse manners! Stareek!”

Kotick swam back to Novastoshnah, leaving the gulls to scream. There he
found that no one sympathized with him in his little attempt to discover
a quiet place for the seals. They told him that men had always driven
the holluschickie--it was part of the day’s work--and that if he did not
like to see ugly things he should not have gone to the killing grounds.
But none of the other seals had seen the killing, and that made the
difference between him and his friends. Besides, Kotick was a white
seal.

“What you must do,” said old Sea Catch, after he had heard his son’s
adventures, “is to grow up and be a big seal like your father, and have
a nursery on the beach, and then they will leave you alone. In another
five years you ought to be able to fight for yourself.” Even gentle
Matkah, his mother, said: “You will never be able to stop the killing.
Go and play in the sea, Kotick.” And Kotick went off and danced the
Fire-dance with a very heavy little heart.

That autumn he left the beach as soon as he could, and set off alone
because of a notion in his bullet-head. He was going to find Sea Cow,
if there was such a person in the sea, and he was going to find a quiet
island with good firm beaches for seals to live on, where men could not
get at them. So he explored and explored by himself from the North to
the South Pacific, swimming as much as three hundred miles in a day
and a night. He met with more adventures than can be told, and narrowly
escaped being caught by the Basking Shark, and the Spotted Shark, and
the Hammerhead, and he met all the untrustworthy ruffians that loaf up
and down the seas, and the heavy polite fish, and the scarlet spotted
scallops that are moored in one place for hundreds of years, and grow
very proud of it; but he never met Sea Cow, and he never found an island
that he could fancy.

If the beach was good and hard, with a slope behind it for seals to play
on, there was always the smoke of a whaler on the horizon, boiling down
blubber, and Kotick knew what that meant. Or else he could see that
seals had once visited the island and been killed off, and Kotick knew
that where men had come once they would come again.

He picked up with an old stumpy-tailed albatross, who told him that
Kerguelen Island was the very place for peace and quiet, and when Kotick
went down there he was all but smashed to pieces against some wicked
black cliffs in a heavy sleet-storm with lightning and thunder. Yet as
he pulled out against the gale he could see that even there had once
been a seal nursery. And it was so in all the other islands that he
visited.

Limmershin gave a long list of them, for he said that Kotick spent five
seasons exploring, with a four months’ rest each year at Novastoshnah,
when the holluschickie used to make fun of him and his imaginary
islands. He went to the Gallapagos, a horrid dry place on the Equator,
where he was nearly baked to death; he went to the Georgia Islands,
the Orkneys, Emerald Island, Little Nightingale Island, Gough’s Island,
Bouvet’s Island, the Crossets, and even to a little speck of an island
south of the Cape of Good Hope. But everywhere the People of the Sea
told him the same things. Seals had come to those islands once upon a
time, but men had killed them all off. Even when he swam thousands of
miles out of the Pacific and got to a place called Cape Corrientes (that
was when he was coming back from Gough’s Island), he found a few hundred
mangy seals on a rock and they told him that men came there too.

That nearly broke his heart, and he headed round the Horn back to his
own beaches; and on his way north he hauled out on an island full of
green trees, where he found an old, old seal who was dying, and Kotick
caught fish for him and told him all his sorrows. “Now,” said Kotick,
“I am going back to Novastoshnah, and if I am driven to the killing-pens
with the holluschickie I shall not care.”

The old seal said, “Try once more. I am the last of the Lost Rookery of
Masafuera, and in the days when men killed us by the hundred thousand
there was a story on the beaches that some day a white seal would come
out of the North and lead the seal people to a quiet place. I am old,
and I shall never live to see that day, but others will. Try once more.”

And Kotick curled up his mustache (it was a beauty) and said, “I am the
only white seal that has ever been born on the beaches, and I am the
only seal, black or white, who ever thought of looking for new islands.”

This cheered him immensely; and when he came back to Novastoshnah that
summer, Matkah, his mother, begged him to marry and settle down, for
he was no longer a holluschick but a full-grown sea-catch, with a curly
white mane on his shoulders, as heavy, as big, and as fierce as his
father. “Give me another season,” he said. “Remember, Mother, it is
always the seventh wave that goes farthest up the beach.”

Curiously enough, there was another seal who thought that she would put
off marrying till the next year, and Kotick danced the Fire-dance with
her all down Lukannon Beach the night before he set off on his last
exploration. This time he went westward, because he had fallen on the
trail of a great shoal of halibut, and he needed at least one hundred
pounds of fish a day to keep him in good condition. He chased them till
he was tired, and then he curled himself up and went to sleep on the
hollows of the ground swell that sets in to Copper Island. He knew the
coast perfectly well, so about midnight, when he felt himself gently
bumped on a weed-bed, he said, “Hm, tide’s running strong tonight,” and
turning over under water opened his eyes slowly and stretched. Then
he jumped like a cat, for he saw huge things nosing about in the shoal
water and browsing on the heavy fringes of the weeds.

“By the Great Combers of Magellan!” he said, beneath his mustache. “Who
in the Deep Sea are these people?”

They were like no walrus, sea lion, seal, bear, whale, shark, fish,
squid, or scallop that Kotick had ever seen before. They were between
twenty and thirty feet long, and they had no hind flippers, but a
shovel-like tail that looked as if it had been whittled out of wet
leather. Their heads were the most foolish-looking things you ever saw,
and they balanced on the ends of their tails in deep water when they
weren’t grazing, bowing solemnly to each other and waving their front
flippers as a fat man waves his arm.

“Ahem!” said Kotick. “Good sport, gentlemen?” The big things answered by
bowing and waving their flippers like the Frog Footman. When they began
feeding again Kotick saw that their upper lip was split into two pieces
that they could twitch apart about a foot and bring together again with
a whole bushel of seaweed between the splits. They tucked the stuff into
their mouths and chumped solemnly.

“Messy style of feeding, that,” said Kotick. They bowed again, and
Kotick began to lose his temper. “Very good,” he said. “If you do happen
to have an extra joint in your front flipper you needn’t show off so. I
see you bow gracefully, but I should like to know your names.” The split
lips moved and twitched; and the glassy green eyes stared, but they did
not speak.

“Well!” said Kotick. “You’re the only people I’ve ever met uglier than
Sea Vitch--and with worse manners.”

Then he remembered in a flash what the Burgomaster gull had screamed
to him when he was a little yearling at Walrus Islet, and he tumbled
backward in the water, for he knew that he had found Sea Cow at last.

The sea cows went on schlooping and grazing and chumping in the weed,
and Kotick asked them questions in every language that he had picked
up in his travels; and the Sea People talk nearly as many languages as
human beings. But the sea cows did not answer because Sea Cow cannot
talk. He has only six bones in his neck where he ought to have seven,
and they say under the sea that that prevents him from speaking even
to his companions. But, as you know, he has an extra joint in his
foreflipper, and by waving it up and down and about he makes what
answers to a sort of clumsy telegraphic code.

By daylight Kotick’s mane was standing on end and his temper was gone
where the dead crabs go. Then the Sea Cow began to travel northward very
slowly, stopping to hold absurd bowing councils from time to time, and
Kotick followed them, saying to himself, “People who are such idiots as
these are would have been killed long ago if they hadn’t found out some
safe island. And what is good enough for the Sea Cow is good enough for
the Sea Catch. All the same, I wish they’d hurry.”

It was weary work for Kotick. The herd never went more than forty or
fifty miles a day, and stopped to feed at night, and kept close to the
shore all the time; while Kotick swam round them, and over them, and
under them, but he could not hurry them up one-half mile. As they went
farther north they held a bowing council every few hours, and Kotick
nearly bit off his mustache with impatience till he saw that they were
following up a warm current of water, and then he respected them more.

One night they sank through the shiny water--sank like stones--and for
the first time since he had known them began to swim quickly. Kotick
followed, and the pace astonished him, for he never dreamed that Sea Cow
was anything of a swimmer. They headed for a cliff by the shore--a cliff
that ran down into deep water, and plunged into a dark hole at the
foot of it, twenty fathoms under the sea. It was a long, long swim, and
Kotick badly wanted fresh air before he was out of the dark tunnel they
led him through.

“My wig!” he said, when he rose, gasping and puffing, into open water at
the farther end. “It was a long dive, but it was worth it.”

The sea cows had separated and were browsing lazily along the edges of
the finest beaches that Kotick had ever seen. There were long
stretches of smooth-worn rock running for miles, exactly fitted to make
seal-nurseries, and there were play-grounds of hard sand sloping inland
behind them, and there were rollers for seals to dance in, and long
grass to roll in, and sand dunes to climb up and down, and, best of all,
Kotick knew by the feel of the water, which never deceives a true sea
catch, that no men had ever come there.

The first thing he did was to assure himself that the fishing was good,
and then he swam along the beaches and counted up the delightful low
sandy islands half hidden in the beautiful rolling fog. Away to the
northward, out to sea, ran a line of bars and shoals and rocks that
would never let a ship come within six miles of the beach, and between
the islands and the mainland was a stretch of deep water that ran up to
the perpendicular cliffs, and somewhere below the cliffs was the mouth
of the tunnel.

“It’s Novastoshnah over again, but ten times better,” said Kotick. “Sea
Cow must be wiser than I thought. Men can’t come down the cliffs, even
if there were any men; and the shoals to seaward would knock a ship to
splinters. If any place in the sea is safe, this is it.”

He began to think of the seal he had left behind him, but though he was
in a hurry to go back to Novastoshnah, he thoroughly explored the new
country, so that he would be able to answer all questions.

Then he dived and made sure of the mouth of the tunnel, and raced
through to the southward. No one but a sea cow or a seal would have
dreamed of there being such a place, and when he looked back at the
cliffs even Kotick could hardly believe that he had been under them.

He was six days going home, though he was not swimming slowly; and when
he hauled out just above Sea Lion’s Neck the first person he met was the
seal who had been waiting for him, and she saw by the look in his eyes
that he had found his island at last.

But the holluschickie and Sea Catch, his father, and all the other seals
laughed at him when he told them what he had discovered, and a young
seal about his own age said, “This is all very well, Kotick, but you
can’t come from no one knows where and order us off like this. Remember
we’ve been fighting for our nurseries, and that’s a thing you never did.
You preferred prowling about in the sea.”

The other seals laughed at this, and the young seal began twisting his
head from side to side. He had just married that year, and was making a
great fuss about it.

“I’ve no nursery to fight for,” said Kotick. “I only want to show you
all a place where you will be safe. What’s the use of fighting?”

“Oh, if you’re trying to back out, of course I’ve no more to say,” said
the young seal with an ugly chuckle.

“Will you come with me if I win?” said Kotick. And a green light came
into his eye, for he was very angry at having to fight at all.

“Very good,” said the young seal carelessly. “If you win, I’ll come.”

He had no time to change his mind, for Kotick’s head was out and his
teeth sunk in the blubber of the young seal’s neck. Then he threw
himself back on his haunches and hauled his enemy down the beach, shook
him, and knocked him over. Then Kotick roared to the seals: “I’ve done
my best for you these five seasons past. I’ve found you the island where
you’ll be safe, but unless your heads are dragged off your silly necks
you won’t believe. I’m going to teach you now. Look out for yourselves!”

Limmershin told me that never in his life--and Limmershin sees ten
thousand big seals fighting every year--never in all his little life
did he see anything like Kotick’s charge into the nurseries. He flung
himself at the biggest sea catch he could find, caught him by the
throat, choked him and bumped him and banged him till he grunted for
mercy, and then threw him aside and attacked the next. You see, Kotick
had never fasted for four months as the big seals did every year, and
his deep-sea swimming trips kept him in perfect condition, and, best
of all, he had never fought before. His curly white mane stood up with
rage, and his eyes flamed, and his big dog teeth glistened, and he was
splendid to look at. Old Sea Catch, his father, saw him tearing past,
hauling the grizzled old seals about as though they had been halibut,
and upsetting the young bachelors in all directions; and Sea Catch gave
a roar and shouted: “He may be a fool, but he is the best fighter on the
beaches! Don’t tackle your father, my son! He’s with you!”

Kotick roared in answer, and old Sea Catch waddled in with his mustache
on end, blowing like a locomotive, while Matkah and the seal that was
going to marry Kotick cowered down and admired their men-folk. It was
a gorgeous fight, for the two fought as long as there was a seal that
dared lift up his head, and when there were none they paraded grandly up
and down the beach side by side, bellowing.

At night, just as the Northern Lights were winking and flashing through
the fog, Kotick climbed a bare rock and looked down on the scattered
nurseries and the torn and bleeding seals. “Now,” he said, “I’ve taught
you your lesson.”

“My wig!” said old Sea Catch, boosting himself up stiffly, for he was
fearfully mauled. “The Killer Whale himself could not have cut them up
worse. Son, I’m proud of you, and what’s more, I’ll come with you to
your island--if there is such a place.”

“Hear you, fat pigs of the sea. Who comes with me to the Sea Cow’s
tunnel? Answer, or I shall teach you again,” roared Kotick.

There was a murmur like the ripple of the tide all up and down the
beaches. “We will come,” said thousands of tired voices. “We will follow
Kotick, the White Seal.”

Then Kotick dropped his head between his shoulders and shut his eyes
proudly. He was not a white seal any more, but red from head to tail.
All the same he would have scorned to look at or touch one of his
wounds.

A week later he and his army (nearly ten thousand holluschickie and old
seals) went away north to the Sea Cow’s tunnel, Kotick leading them,
and the seals that stayed at Novastoshnah called them idiots. But next
spring, when they all met off the fishing banks of the Pacific, Kotick’s
seals told such tales of the new beaches beyond Sea Cow’s tunnel that
more and more seals left Novastoshnah. Of course it was not all done at
once, for the seals are not very clever, and they need a long time to
turn things over in their minds, but year after year more seals went
away from Novastoshnah, and Lukannon, and the other nurseries, to the
quiet, sheltered beaches where Kotick sits all the summer through,
getting bigger and fatter and stronger each year, while the
holluschickie play around him, in that sea where no man comes.




Lukannon

This is the great deep-sea song that all the St. Paul seals sing when
they are heading back to their beaches in the summer. It is a sort of
very sad seal National Anthem.

     I met my mates in the morning (and, oh, but I am old!)
     Where roaring on the ledges the summer ground-swell rolled;
     I heard them lift the chorus that drowned the breakers’ song--
     The Beaches of Lukannon--two million voices strong.

     The song of pleasant stations beside the salt lagoons,
     The song of blowing squadrons that shuffled down the dunes,
     The song of midnight dances that churned the sea to flame--
     The Beaches of Lukannon--before the sealers came!

     I met my mates in the morning (I’ll never meet them more!);
     They came and went in legions that darkened all the shore.
     And o’er the foam-flecked offing as far as voice could reach
     We hailed the landing-parties and we sang them up the beach.

     The Beaches of Lukannon--the winter wheat so tall--
     The dripping, crinkled lichens, and the sea-fog drenching all!
     The platforms of our playground, all shining smooth and worn!
     The Beaches of Lukannon--the home where we were born!

     I met my mates in the morning, a broken, scattered band.
     Men shoot us in the water and club us on the land;
     Men drive us to the Salt House like silly sheep and tame,
     And still we sing Lukannon--before the sealers came.

     Wheel down, wheel down to southward; oh, Gooverooska, go!
     And tell the Deep-Sea Viceroys the story of our woe;
     Ere, empty as the shark’s egg the tempest flings ashore,
     The Beaches of Lukannon shall know their sons no more!




“Rikki-Tikki-Tavi”

     At the hole where he went in
     Red-Eye called to Wrinkle-Skin.
     Hear what little Red-Eye saith:
     “Nag, come up and dance with death!”

     Eye to eye and head to head,
        (Keep the measure, Nag.)
     This shall end when one is dead;
        (At thy pleasure, Nag.)
     Turn for turn and twist for twist--
        (Run and hide thee, Nag.)
     Hah!  The hooded Death has missed!
        (Woe betide thee, Nag!)

This is the story of the great war that Rikki-tikki-tavi fought
single-handed, through the bath-rooms of the big bungalow in Segowlee
cantonment. Darzee, the Tailorbird, helped him, and Chuchundra, the
musk-rat, who never comes out into the middle of the floor, but always
creeps round by the wall, gave him advice, but Rikki-tikki did the real
fighting.

He was a mongoose, rather like a little cat in his fur and his tail, but
quite like a weasel in his head and his habits. His eyes and the end
of his restless nose were pink. He could scratch himself anywhere he
pleased with any leg, front or back, that he chose to use. He could
fluff up his tail till it looked like a bottle brush, and his war cry as
he scuttled through the long grass was: “Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!”

One day, a high summer flood washed him out of the burrow where he lived
with his father and mother, and carried him, kicking and clucking, down
a roadside ditch. He found a little wisp of grass floating there, and
clung to it till he lost his senses. When he revived, he was lying in
the hot sun on the middle of a garden path, very draggled indeed, and a
small boy was saying, “Here’s a dead mongoose. Let’s have a funeral.”

“No,” said his mother, “let’s take him in and dry him. Perhaps he isn’t
really dead.”

They took him into the house, and a big man picked him up between his
finger and thumb and said he was not dead but half choked. So they
wrapped him in cotton wool, and warmed him over a little fire, and he
opened his eyes and sneezed.

“Now,” said the big man (he was an Englishman who had just moved into
the bungalow), “don’t frighten him, and we’ll see what he’ll do.”

It is the hardest thing in the world to frighten a mongoose, because
he is eaten up from nose to tail with curiosity. The motto of all
the mongoose family is “Run and find out,” and Rikki-tikki was a true
mongoose. He looked at the cotton wool, decided that it was not good to
eat, ran all round the table, sat up and put his fur in order, scratched
himself, and jumped on the small boy’s shoulder.

“Don’t be frightened, Teddy,” said his father. “That’s his way of making
friends.”

“Ouch! He’s tickling under my chin,” said Teddy.

Rikki-tikki looked down between the boy’s collar and neck, snuffed at
his ear, and climbed down to the floor, where he sat rubbing his nose.

“Good gracious,” said Teddy’s mother, “and that’s a wild creature! I
suppose he’s so tame because we’ve been kind to him.”

“All mongooses are like that,” said her husband. “If Teddy doesn’t pick
him up by the tail, or try to put him in a cage, he’ll run in and out of
the house all day long. Let’s give him something to eat.”

They gave him a little piece of raw meat. Rikki-tikki liked it
immensely, and when it was finished he went out into the veranda and sat
in the sunshine and fluffed up his fur to make it dry to the roots. Then
he felt better.

“There are more things to find out about in this house,” he said to
himself, “than all my family could find out in all their lives. I shall
certainly stay and find out.”

He spent all that day roaming over the house. He nearly drowned himself
in the bath-tubs, put his nose into the ink on a writing table, and
burned it on the end of the big man’s cigar, for he climbed up in the
big man’s lap to see how writing was done. At nightfall he ran into
Teddy’s nursery to watch how kerosene lamps were lighted, and when Teddy
went to bed Rikki-tikki climbed up too. But he was a restless companion,
because he had to get up and attend to every noise all through the
night, and find out what made it. Teddy’s mother and father came in,
the last thing, to look at their boy, and Rikki-tikki was awake on
the pillow. “I don’t like that,” said Teddy’s mother. “He may bite the
child.” “He’ll do no such thing,” said the father. “Teddy’s safer with
that little beast than if he had a bloodhound to watch him. If a snake
came into the nursery now--”

But Teddy’s mother wouldn’t think of anything so awful.

Early in the morning Rikki-tikki came to early breakfast in the veranda
riding on Teddy’s shoulder, and they gave him banana and some boiled
egg. He sat on all their laps one after the other, because every
well-brought-up mongoose always hopes to be a house mongoose some day
and have rooms to run about in; and Rikki-tikki’s mother (she used to
live in the general’s house at Segowlee) had carefully told Rikki what
to do if ever he came across white men.

Then Rikki-tikki went out into the garden to see what was to be seen.
It was a large garden, only half cultivated, with bushes, as big as
summer-houses, of Marshal Niel roses, lime and orange trees, clumps of
bamboos, and thickets of high grass. Rikki-tikki licked his lips. “This
is a splendid hunting-ground,” he said, and his tail grew bottle-brushy
at the thought of it, and he scuttled up and down the garden, snuffing
here and there till he heard very sorrowful voices in a thorn-bush.

It was Darzee, the Tailorbird, and his wife. They had made a beautiful
nest by pulling two big leaves together and stitching them up the edges
with fibers, and had filled the hollow with cotton and downy fluff. The
nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and cried.

“What is the matter?” asked Rikki-tikki.

“We are very miserable,” said Darzee. “One of our babies fell out of the
nest yesterday and Nag ate him.”

“H’m!” said Rikki-tikki, “that is very sad--but I am a stranger here.
Who is Nag?”

Darzee and his wife only cowered down in the nest without answering, for
from the thick grass at the foot of the bush there came a low hiss--a
horrid cold sound that made Rikki-tikki jump back two clear feet. Then
inch by inch out of the grass rose up the head and spread hood of Nag,
the big black cobra, and he was five feet long from tongue to tail.
When he had lifted one-third of himself clear of the ground, he stayed
balancing to and fro exactly as a dandelion tuft balances in the wind,
and he looked at Rikki-tikki with the wicked snake’s eyes that never
change their expression, whatever the snake may be thinking of.

“Who is Nag?” said he. “I am Nag. The great God Brahm put his mark upon
all our people, when the first cobra spread his hood to keep the sun off
Brahm as he slept. Look, and be afraid!”

He spread out his hood more than ever, and Rikki-tikki saw the
spectacle-mark on the back of it that looks exactly like the eye part
of a hook-and-eye fastening. He was afraid for the minute, but it is
impossible for a mongoose to stay frightened for any length of time, and
though Rikki-tikki had never met a live cobra before, his mother had fed
him on dead ones, and he knew that all a grown mongoose’s business in
life was to fight and eat snakes. Nag knew that too and, at the bottom
of his cold heart, he was afraid.

“Well,” said Rikki-tikki, and his tail began to fluff up again, “marks
or no marks, do you think it is right for you to eat fledglings out of a
nest?”

Nag was thinking to himself, and watching the least little movement in
the grass behind Rikki-tikki. He knew that mongooses in the garden
meant death sooner or later for him and his family, but he wanted to get
Rikki-tikki off his guard. So he dropped his head a little, and put it
on one side.

“Let us talk,” he said. “You eat eggs. Why should not I eat birds?”

“Behind you! Look behind you!” sang Darzee.

Rikki-tikki knew better than to waste time in staring. He jumped up in
the air as high as he could go, and just under him whizzed by the head
of Nagaina, Nag’s wicked wife. She had crept up behind him as he was
talking, to make an end of him. He heard her savage hiss as the stroke
missed. He came down almost across her back, and if he had been an old
mongoose he would have known that then was the time to break her back
with one bite; but he was afraid of the terrible lashing return stroke
of the cobra. He bit, indeed, but did not bite long enough, and he
jumped clear of the whisking tail, leaving Nagaina torn and angry.

“Wicked, wicked Darzee!” said Nag, lashing up as high as he could reach
toward the nest in the thorn-bush. But Darzee had built it out of reach
of snakes, and it only swayed to and fro.

Rikki-tikki felt his eyes growing red and hot (when a mongoose’s eyes
grow red, he is angry), and he sat back on his tail and hind legs like a
little kangaroo, and looked all round him, and chattered with rage. But
Nag and Nagaina had disappeared into the grass. When a snake misses its
stroke, it never says anything or gives any sign of what it means to do
next. Rikki-tikki did not care to follow them, for he did not feel sure
that he could manage two snakes at once. So he trotted off to the gravel
path near the house, and sat down to think. It was a serious matter for
him.

If you read the old books of natural history, you will find they say
that when the mongoose fights the snake and happens to get bitten,
he runs off and eats some herb that cures him. That is not true.
The victory is only a matter of quickness of eye and quickness of
foot--snake’s blow against mongoose’s jump--and as no eye can follow the
motion of a snake’s head when it strikes, this makes things much more
wonderful than any magic herb. Rikki-tikki knew he was a young mongoose,
and it made him all the more pleased to think that he had managed to
escape a blow from behind. It gave him confidence in himself, and when
Teddy came running down the path, Rikki-tikki was ready to be petted.

But just as Teddy was stooping, something wriggled a little in the dust,
and a tiny voice said: “Be careful. I am Death!” It was Karait, the
dusty brown snakeling that lies for choice on the dusty earth; and his
bite is as dangerous as the cobra’s. But he is so small that nobody
thinks of him, and so he does the more harm to people.

Rikki-tikki’s eyes grew red again, and he danced up to Karait with the
peculiar rocking, swaying motion that he had inherited from his family.
It looks very funny, but it is so perfectly balanced a gait that you can
fly off from it at any angle you please, and in dealing with snakes this
is an advantage. If Rikki-tikki had only known, he was doing a much more
dangerous thing than fighting Nag, for Karait is so small, and can turn
so quickly, that unless Rikki bit him close to the back of the head,
he would get the return stroke in his eye or his lip. But Rikki did not
know. His eyes were all red, and he rocked back and forth, looking for
a good place to hold. Karait struck out. Rikki jumped sideways and
tried to run in, but the wicked little dusty gray head lashed within a
fraction of his shoulder, and he had to jump over the body, and the head
followed his heels close.

Teddy shouted to the house: “Oh, look here! Our mongoose is killing a
snake.” And Rikki-tikki heard a scream from Teddy’s mother. His father
ran out with a stick, but by the time he came up, Karait had lunged out
once too far, and Rikki-tikki had sprung, jumped on the snake’s back,
dropped his head far between his forelegs, bitten as high up the back
as he could get hold, and rolled away. That bite paralyzed Karait, and
Rikki-tikki was just going to eat him up from the tail, after the custom
of his family at dinner, when he remembered that a full meal makes a
slow mongoose, and if he wanted all his strength and quickness ready, he
must keep himself thin.

He went away for a dust bath under the castor-oil bushes, while
Teddy’s father beat the dead Karait. “What is the use of that?” thought
Rikki-tikki. “I have settled it all;” and then Teddy’s mother picked
him up from the dust and hugged him, crying that he had saved Teddy
from death, and Teddy’s father said that he was a providence, and Teddy
looked on with big scared eyes. Rikki-tikki was rather amused at all the
fuss, which, of course, he did not understand. Teddy’s mother might just
as well have petted Teddy for playing in the dust. Rikki was thoroughly
enjoying himself.

That night at dinner, walking to and fro among the wine-glasses on the
table, he might have stuffed himself three times over with nice things.
But he remembered Nag and Nagaina, and though it was very pleasant to be
patted and petted by Teddy’s mother, and to sit on Teddy’s shoulder, his
eyes would get red from time to time, and he would go off into his long
war cry of “Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!”

Teddy carried him off to bed, and insisted on Rikki-tikki sleeping under
his chin. Rikki-tikki was too well bred to bite or scratch, but as soon
as Teddy was asleep he went off for his nightly walk round the house,
and in the dark he ran up against Chuchundra, the musk-rat, creeping
around by the wall. Chuchundra is a broken-hearted little beast. He
whimpers and cheeps all the night, trying to make up his mind to run
into the middle of the room. But he never gets there.

“Don’t kill me,” said Chuchundra, almost weeping. “Rikki-tikki, don’t
kill me!”

“Do you think a snake-killer kills muskrats?” said Rikki-tikki
scornfully.

“Those who kill snakes get killed by snakes,” said Chuchundra, more
sorrowfully than ever. “And how am I to be sure that Nag won’t mistake
me for you some dark night?”

“There’s not the least danger,” said Rikki-tikki. “But Nag is in the
garden, and I know you don’t go there.”

“My cousin Chua, the rat, told me--” said Chuchundra, and then he
stopped.

“Told you what?”

“H’sh! Nag is everywhere, Rikki-tikki. You should have talked to Chua in
the garden.”

“I didn’t--so you must tell me. Quick, Chuchundra, or I’ll bite you!”

Chuchundra sat down and cried till the tears rolled off his whiskers.
“I am a very poor man,” he sobbed. “I never had spirit enough to run out
into the middle of the room. H’sh! I mustn’t tell you anything. Can’t
you hear, Rikki-tikki?”

Rikki-tikki listened. The house was as still as still, but he thought he
could just catch the faintest scratch-scratch in the world--a noise as
faint as that of a wasp walking on a window-pane--the dry scratch of a
snake’s scales on brick-work.

“That’s Nag or Nagaina,” he said to himself, “and he is crawling into
the bath-room sluice. You’re right, Chuchundra; I should have talked to
Chua.”

He stole off to Teddy’s bath-room, but there was nothing there, and then
to Teddy’s mother’s bathroom. At the bottom of the smooth plaster wall
there was a brick pulled out to make a sluice for the bath water, and as
Rikki-tikki stole in by the masonry curb where the bath is put, he heard
Nag and Nagaina whispering together outside in the moonlight.

“When the house is emptied of people,” said Nagaina to her husband, “he
will have to go away, and then the garden will be our own again. Go in
quietly, and remember that the big man who killed Karait is the first
one to bite. Then come out and tell me, and we will hunt for Rikki-tikki
together.”

“But are you sure that there is anything to be gained by killing the
people?” said Nag.

“Everything. When there were no people in the bungalow, did we have any
mongoose in the garden? So long as the bungalow is empty, we are king
and queen of the garden; and remember that as soon as our eggs in the
melon bed hatch (as they may tomorrow), our children will need room and
quiet.”

“I had not thought of that,” said Nag. “I will go, but there is no need
that we should hunt for Rikki-tikki afterward. I will kill the big man
and his wife, and the child if I can, and come away quietly. Then the
bungalow will be empty, and Rikki-tikki will go.”

Rikki-tikki tingled all over with rage and hatred at this, and then
Nag’s head came through the sluice, and his five feet of cold body
followed it. Angry as he was, Rikki-tikki was very frightened as he saw
the size of the big cobra. Nag coiled himself up, raised his head,
and looked into the bathroom in the dark, and Rikki could see his eyes
glitter.

“Now, if I kill him here, Nagaina will know; and if I fight him on
the open floor, the odds are in his favor. What am I to do?” said
Rikki-tikki-tavi.

Nag waved to and fro, and then Rikki-tikki heard him drinking from the
biggest water-jar that was used to fill the bath. “That is good,” said
the snake. “Now, when Karait was killed, the big man had a stick. He may
have that stick still, but when he comes in to bathe in the morning he
will not have a stick. I shall wait here till he comes. Nagaina--do you
hear me?--I shall wait here in the cool till daytime.”

There was no answer from outside, so Rikki-tikki knew Nagaina had gone
away. Nag coiled himself down, coil by coil, round the bulge at the
bottom of the water jar, and Rikki-tikki stayed still as death. After an
hour he began to move, muscle by muscle, toward the jar. Nag was asleep,
and Rikki-tikki looked at his big back, wondering which would be the
best place for a good hold. “If I don’t break his back at the first
jump,” said Rikki, “he can still fight. And if he fights--O Rikki!” He
looked at the thickness of the neck below the hood, but that was too
much for him; and a bite near the tail would only make Nag savage.

“It must be the head”’ he said at last; “the head above the hood. And,
when I am once there, I must not let go.”

Then he jumped. The head was lying a little clear of the water jar,
under the curve of it; and, as his teeth met, Rikki braced his back
against the bulge of the red earthenware to hold down the head. This
gave him just one second’s purchase, and he made the most of it. Then he
was battered to and fro as a rat is shaken by a dog--to and fro on the
floor, up and down, and around in great circles, but his eyes were red
and he held on as the body cart-whipped over the floor, upsetting the
tin dipper and the soap dish and the flesh brush, and banged against the
tin side of the bath. As he held he closed his jaws tighter and tighter,
for he made sure he would be banged to death, and, for the honor of his
family, he preferred to be found with his teeth locked. He was dizzy,
aching, and felt shaken to pieces when something went off like a
thunderclap just behind him. A hot wind knocked him senseless and red
fire singed his fur. The big man had been wakened by the noise, and had
fired both barrels of a shotgun into Nag just behind the hood.

Rikki-tikki held on with his eyes shut, for now he was quite sure he was
dead. But the head did not move, and the big man picked him up and said,
“It’s the mongoose again, Alice. The little chap has saved our lives
now.”

Then Teddy’s mother came in with a very white face, and saw what was
left of Nag, and Rikki-tikki dragged himself to Teddy’s bedroom and
spent half the rest of the night shaking himself tenderly to find out
whether he really was broken into forty pieces, as he fancied.

When morning came he was very stiff, but well pleased with his doings.
“Now I have Nagaina to settle with, and she will be worse than five
Nags, and there’s no knowing when the eggs she spoke of will hatch.
Goodness! I must go and see Darzee,” he said.

Without waiting for breakfast, Rikki-tikki ran to the thornbush where
Darzee was singing a song of triumph at the top of his voice. The news
of Nag’s death was all over the garden, for the sweeper had thrown the
body on the rubbish-heap.

“Oh, you stupid tuft of feathers!” said Rikki-tikki angrily. “Is this
the time to sing?”

“Nag is dead--is dead--is dead!” sang Darzee. “The valiant Rikki-tikki
caught him by the head and held fast. The big man brought the
bang-stick, and Nag fell in two pieces! He will never eat my babies
again.”

“All that’s true enough. But where’s Nagaina?” said Rikki-tikki, looking
carefully round him.

“Nagaina came to the bathroom sluice and called for Nag,” Darzee went
on, “and Nag came out on the end of a stick--the sweeper picked him up
on the end of a stick and threw him upon the rubbish heap. Let us sing
about the great, the red-eyed Rikki-tikki!” And Darzee filled his throat
and sang.

“If I could get up to your nest, I’d roll your babies out!” said
Rikki-tikki. “You don’t know when to do the right thing at the right
time. You’re safe enough in your nest there, but it’s war for me down
here. Stop singing a minute, Darzee.”

“For the great, the beautiful Rikki-tikki’s sake I will stop,” said
Darzee. “What is it, O Killer of the terrible Nag?”

“Where is Nagaina, for the third time?”

“On the rubbish heap by the stables, mourning for Nag. Great is
Rikki-tikki with the white teeth.”

“Bother my white teeth! Have you ever heard where she keeps her eggs?”

“In the melon bed, on the end nearest the wall, where the sun strikes
nearly all day. She hid them there weeks ago.”

“And you never thought it worth while to tell me? The end nearest the
wall, you said?”

“Rikki-tikki, you are not going to eat her eggs?”

“Not eat exactly; no. Darzee, if you have a grain of sense you will fly
off to the stables and pretend that your wing is broken, and let Nagaina
chase you away to this bush. I must get to the melon-bed, and if I went
there now she’d see me.”

Darzee was a feather-brained little fellow who could never hold more
than one idea at a time in his head. And just because he knew that
Nagaina’s children were born in eggs like his own, he didn’t think at
first that it was fair to kill them. But his wife was a sensible bird,
and she knew that cobra’s eggs meant young cobras later on. So she flew
off from the nest, and left Darzee to keep the babies warm, and continue
his song about the death of Nag. Darzee was very like a man in some
ways.

She fluttered in front of Nagaina by the rubbish heap and cried out,
“Oh, my wing is broken! The boy in the house threw a stone at me and
broke it.” Then she fluttered more desperately than ever.

Nagaina lifted up her head and hissed, “You warned Rikki-tikki when I
would have killed him. Indeed and truly, you’ve chosen a bad place to
be lame in.” And she moved toward Darzee’s wife, slipping along over the
dust.

“The boy broke it with a stone!” shrieked Darzee’s wife.

“Well! It may be some consolation to you when you’re dead to know that I
shall settle accounts with the boy. My husband lies on the rubbish heap
this morning, but before night the boy in the house will lie very still.
What is the use of running away? I am sure to catch you. Little fool,
look at me!”

Darzee’s wife knew better than to do that, for a bird who looks at a
snake’s eyes gets so frightened that she cannot move. Darzee’s wife
fluttered on, piping sorrowfully, and never leaving the ground, and
Nagaina quickened her pace.

Rikki-tikki heard them going up the path from the stables, and he raced
for the end of the melon patch near the wall. There, in the warm litter
above the melons, very cunningly hidden, he found twenty-five eggs,
about the size of a bantam’s eggs, but with whitish skin instead of
shell.

“I was not a day too soon,” he said, for he could see the baby cobras
curled up inside the skin, and he knew that the minute they were hatched
they could each kill a man or a mongoose. He bit off the tops of the
eggs as fast as he could, taking care to crush the young cobras, and
turned over the litter from time to time to see whether he had missed
any. At last there were only three eggs left, and Rikki-tikki began to
chuckle to himself, when he heard Darzee’s wife screaming:

“Rikki-tikki, I led Nagaina toward the house, and she has gone into the
veranda, and--oh, come quickly--she means killing!”

Rikki-tikki smashed two eggs, and tumbled backward down the melon-bed
with the third egg in his mouth, and scuttled to the veranda as hard as
he could put foot to the ground. Teddy and his mother and father were
there at early breakfast, but Rikki-tikki saw that they were not eating
anything. They sat stone-still, and their faces were white. Nagaina was
coiled up on the matting by Teddy’s chair, within easy striking distance
of Teddy’s bare leg, and she was swaying to and fro, singing a song of
triumph.

“Son of the big man that killed Nag,” she hissed, “stay still. I am not
ready yet. Wait a little. Keep very still, all you three! If you move I
strike, and if you do not move I strike. Oh, foolish people, who killed
my Nag!”

Teddy’s eyes were fixed on his father, and all his father could do was
to whisper, “Sit still, Teddy. You mustn’t move. Teddy, keep still.”

Then Rikki-tikki came up and cried, “Turn round, Nagaina. Turn and
fight!”

“All in good time,” said she, without moving her eyes. “I will settle my
account with you presently. Look at your friends, Rikki-tikki. They are
still and white. They are afraid. They dare not move, and if you come a
step nearer I strike.”

“Look at your eggs,” said Rikki-tikki, “in the melon bed near the wall.
Go and look, Nagaina!”

The big snake turned half around, and saw the egg on the veranda. “Ah-h!
Give it to me,” she said.

Rikki-tikki put his paws one on each side of the egg, and his eyes were
blood-red. “What price for a snake’s egg? For a young cobra? For a
young king cobra? For the last--the very last of the brood? The ants are
eating all the others down by the melon bed.”

Nagaina spun clear round, forgetting everything for the sake of the one
egg. Rikki-tikki saw Teddy’s father shoot out a big hand, catch Teddy
by the shoulder, and drag him across the little table with the tea-cups,
safe and out of reach of Nagaina.

“Tricked! Tricked! Tricked! Rikk-tck-tck!” chuckled Rikki-tikki. “The
boy is safe, and it was I--I--I that caught Nag by the hood last night
in the bathroom.” Then he began to jump up and down, all four feet
together, his head close to the floor. “He threw me to and fro, but he
could not shake me off. He was dead before the big man blew him in two.
I did it! Rikki-tikki-tck-tck! Come then, Nagaina. Come and fight with
me. You shall not be a widow long.”

Nagaina saw that she had lost her chance of killing Teddy, and the egg
lay between Rikki-tikki’s paws. “Give me the egg, Rikki-tikki. Give me
the last of my eggs, and I will go away and never come back,” she said,
lowering her hood.

“Yes, you will go away, and you will never come back. For you will go
to the rubbish heap with Nag. Fight, widow! The big man has gone for his
gun! Fight!”

Rikki-tikki was bounding all round Nagaina, keeping just out of reach
of her stroke, his little eyes like hot coals. Nagaina gathered herself
together and flung out at him. Rikki-tikki jumped up and backward. Again
and again and again she struck, and each time her head came with a whack
on the matting of the veranda and she gathered herself together like a
watch spring. Then Rikki-tikki danced in a circle to get behind her, and
Nagaina spun round to keep her head to his head, so that the rustle of
her tail on the matting sounded like dry leaves blown along by the wind.

He had forgotten the egg. It still lay on the veranda, and Nagaina came
nearer and nearer to it, till at last, while Rikki-tikki was drawing
breath, she caught it in her mouth, turned to the veranda steps, and
flew like an arrow down the path, with Rikki-tikki behind her. When
the cobra runs for her life, she goes like a whip-lash flicked across a
horse’s neck.

Rikki-tikki knew that he must catch her, or all the trouble would begin
again. She headed straight for the long grass by the thorn-bush, and as
he was running Rikki-tikki heard Darzee still singing his foolish little
song of triumph. But Darzee’s wife was wiser. She flew off her nest
as Nagaina came along, and flapped her wings about Nagaina’s head. If
Darzee had helped they might have turned her, but Nagaina only lowered
her hood and went on. Still, the instant’s delay brought Rikki-tikki up
to her, and as she plunged into the rat-hole where she and Nag used to
live, his little white teeth were clenched on her tail, and he went down
with her--and very few mongooses, however wise and old they may be,
care to follow a cobra into its hole. It was dark in the hole; and
Rikki-tikki never knew when it might open out and give Nagaina room to
turn and strike at him. He held on savagely, and stuck out his feet to
act as brakes on the dark slope of the hot, moist earth.

Then the grass by the mouth of the hole stopped waving, and Darzee said,
“It is all over with Rikki-tikki! We must sing his death song. Valiant
Rikki-tikki is dead! For Nagaina will surely kill him underground.”

So he sang a very mournful song that he made up on the spur of the
minute, and just as he got to the most touching part, the grass quivered
again, and Rikki-tikki, covered with dirt, dragged himself out of the
hole leg by leg, licking his whiskers. Darzee stopped with a little
shout. Rikki-tikki shook some of the dust out of his fur and sneezed.
“It is all over,” he said. “The widow will never come out again.” And
the red ants that live between the grass stems heard him, and began to
troop down one after another to see if he had spoken the truth.

Rikki-tikki curled himself up in the grass and slept where he was--slept
and slept till it was late in the afternoon, for he had done a hard
day’s work.

“Now,” he said, when he awoke, “I will go back to the house. Tell the
Coppersmith, Darzee, and he will tell the garden that Nagaina is dead.”

The Coppersmith is a bird who makes a noise exactly like the beating of
a little hammer on a copper pot; and the reason he is always making it
is because he is the town crier to every Indian garden, and tells all
the news to everybody who cares to listen. As Rikki-tikki went up the
path, he heard his “attention” notes like a tiny dinner gong, and
then the steady “Ding-dong-tock! Nag is dead--dong! Nagaina is dead!
Ding-dong-tock!” That set all the birds in the garden singing, and the
frogs croaking, for Nag and Nagaina used to eat frogs as well as little
birds.

When Rikki got to the house, Teddy and Teddy’s mother (she looked very
white still, for she had been fainting) and Teddy’s father came out and
almost cried over him; and that night he ate all that was given him till
he could eat no more, and went to bed on Teddy’s shoulder, where Teddy’s
mother saw him when she came to look late at night.

“He saved our lives and Teddy’s life,” she said to her husband. “Just
think, he saved all our lives.”

Rikki-tikki woke up with a jump, for the mongooses are light sleepers.

“Oh, it’s you,” said he. “What are you bothering for? All the cobras are
dead. And if they weren’t, I’m here.”

Rikki-tikki had a right to be proud of himself. But he did not grow too
proud, and he kept that garden as a mongoose should keep it, with tooth
and jump and spring and bite, till never a cobra dared show its head
inside the walls.




Darzee’s Chant

     (Sung in honor of Rikki-tikki-tavi)

     Singer and tailor am I--
        Doubled the joys that I know--
     Proud of my lilt to the sky,
        Proud of the house that I sew--
     Over and under, so weave I my music--so weave I the house that I
        sew.

     Sing to your fledglings again,
        Mother, oh lift up your head!
     Evil that plagued us is slain,
        Death in the garden lies dead.
     Terror that hid in the roses is impotent--flung on the dung-hill
     and dead!

     Who has delivered us, who?
        Tell me his nest and his name.
     Rikki, the valiant, the true,
        Tikki, with eyeballs of flame,
     Rikk-tikki-tikki, the ivory-fanged, the hunter with eyeballs of
     flame!

     Give him the Thanks of the Birds,
        Bowing with tail feathers spread!
     Praise him with nightingale words--
        Nay, I will praise him instead.
     Hear!  I will sing you the praise of the bottle-tailed Rikki, with
     eyeballs of red!

     (Here Rikki-tikki interrupted, and the rest of the song is
     lost.)




Toomai of the Elephants

     I will remember what I was, I am sick of rope and chain--
        I will remember my old strength and all my forest affairs.
     I will not sell my back to man for a bundle of sugar-cane:
        I will go out to my own kind, and the wood-folk in their lairs.

     I will go out until the day, until the morning break--
        Out to the wind’s untainted kiss, the water’s clean caress;
     I will forget my ankle-ring and snap my picket stake.
        I will revisit my lost loves, and playmates masterless!

Kala Nag, which means Black Snake, had served the Indian Government in
every way that an elephant could serve it for forty-seven years, and as
he was fully twenty years old when he was caught, that makes him nearly
seventy--a ripe age for an elephant. He remembered pushing, with a big
leather pad on his forehead, at a gun stuck in deep mud, and that was
before the Afghan War of 1842, and he had not then come to his full
strength.

His mother Radha Pyari,--Radha the darling,--who had been caught in the
same drive with Kala Nag, told him, before his little milk tusks had
dropped out, that elephants who were afraid always got hurt. Kala Nag
knew that that advice was good, for the first time that he saw a shell
burst he backed, screaming, into a stand of piled rifles, and the
bayonets pricked him in all his softest places. So, before he was
twenty-five, he gave up being afraid, and so he was the best-loved
and the best-looked-after elephant in the service of the Government of
India. He had carried tents, twelve hundred pounds’ weight of tents, on
the march in Upper India. He had been hoisted into a ship at the end of
a steam crane and taken for days across the water, and made to carry a
mortar on his back in a strange and rocky country very far from India,
and had seen the Emperor Theodore lying dead in Magdala, and had
come back again in the steamer entitled, so the soldiers said, to the
Abyssinian War medal. He had seen his fellow elephants die of cold and
epilepsy and starvation and sunstroke up at a place called Ali Musjid,
ten years later; and afterward he had been sent down thousands of miles
south to haul and pile big balks of teak in the timberyards at Moulmein.
There he had half killed an insubordinate young elephant who was
shirking his fair share of work.

After that he was taken off timber-hauling, and employed, with a few
score other elephants who were trained to the business, in helping to
catch wild elephants among the Garo hills. Elephants are very strictly
preserved by the Indian Government. There is one whole department which
does nothing else but hunt them, and catch them, and break them in, and
send them up and down the country as they are needed for work.

Kala Nag stood ten fair feet at the shoulders, and his tusks had been
cut off short at five feet, and bound round the ends, to prevent them
splitting, with bands of copper; but he could do more with those stumps
than any untrained elephant could do with the real sharpened ones. When,
after weeks and weeks of cautious driving of scattered elephants across
the hills, the forty or fifty wild monsters were driven into the last
stockade, and the big drop gate, made of tree trunks lashed together,
jarred down behind them, Kala Nag, at the word of command, would go
into that flaring, trumpeting pandemonium (generally at night, when
the flicker of the torches made it difficult to judge distances), and,
picking out the biggest and wildest tusker of the mob, would hammer
him and hustle him into quiet while the men on the backs of the other
elephants roped and tied the smaller ones.

There was nothing in the way of fighting that Kala Nag, the old wise
Black Snake, did not know, for he had stood up more than once in his
time to the charge of the wounded tiger, and, curling up his soft trunk
to be out of harm’s way, had knocked the springing brute sideways in
mid-air with a quick sickle cut of his head, that he had invented all by
himself; had knocked him over, and kneeled upon him with his huge knees
till the life went out with a gasp and a howl, and there was only a
fluffy striped thing on the ground for Kala Nag to pull by the tail.

“Yes,” said Big Toomai, his driver, the son of Black Toomai who had
taken him to Abyssinia, and grandson of Toomai of the Elephants who had
seen him caught, “there is nothing that the Black Snake fears except me.
He has seen three generations of us feed him and groom him, and he will
live to see four.”

“He is afraid of me also,” said Little Toomai, standing up to his full
height of four feet, with only one rag upon him. He was ten years old,
the eldest son of Big Toomai, and, according to custom, he would take
his father’s place on Kala Nag’s neck when he grew up, and would handle
the heavy iron ankus, the elephant goad, that had been worn smooth by
his father, and his grandfather, and his great-grandfather.

He knew what he was talking of; for he had been born under Kala Nag’s
shadow, had played with the end of his trunk before he could walk, had
taken him down to water as soon as he could walk, and Kala Nag would no
more have dreamed of disobeying his shrill little orders than he would
have dreamed of killing him on that day when Big Toomai carried the
little brown baby under Kala Nag’s tusks, and told him to salute his
master that was to be.

“Yes,” said Little Toomai, “he is afraid of me,” and he took long
strides up to Kala Nag, called him a fat old pig, and made him lift up
his feet one after the other.

“Wah!” said Little Toomai, “thou art a big elephant,” and he wagged his
fluffy head, quoting his father. “The Government may pay for elephants,
but they belong to us mahouts. When thou art old, Kala Nag, there will
come some rich rajah, and he will buy thee from the Government, on
account of thy size and thy manners, and then thou wilt have nothing
to do but to carry gold earrings in thy ears, and a gold howdah on thy
back, and a red cloth covered with gold on thy sides, and walk at the
head of the processions of the King. Then I shall sit on thy neck, O
Kala Nag, with a silver ankus, and men will run before us with golden
sticks, crying, `Room for the King’s elephant!’ That will be good, Kala
Nag, but not so good as this hunting in the jungles.”

“Umph!” said Big Toomai. “Thou art a boy, and as wild as a buffalo-calf.
This running up and down among the hills is not the best Government
service. I am getting old, and I do not love wild elephants. Give me
brick elephant lines, one stall to each elephant, and big stumps to tie
them to safely, and flat, broad roads to exercise upon, instead of this
come-and-go camping. Aha, the Cawnpore barracks were good. There was a
bazaar close by, and only three hours’ work a day.”

Little Toomai remembered the Cawnpore elephant-lines and said nothing.
He very much preferred the camp life, and hated those broad, flat roads,
with the daily grubbing for grass in the forage reserve, and the long
hours when there was nothing to do except to watch Kala Nag fidgeting in
his pickets.

What Little Toomai liked was to scramble up bridle paths that only an
elephant could take; the dip into the valley below; the glimpses of the
wild elephants browsing miles away; the rush of the frightened pig and
peacock under Kala Nag’s feet; the blinding warm rains, when all the
hills and valleys smoked; the beautiful misty mornings when nobody knew
where they would camp that night; the steady, cautious drive of the wild
elephants, and the mad rush and blaze and hullabaloo of the last night’s
drive, when the elephants poured into the stockade like boulders in a
landslide, found that they could not get out, and flung themselves at
the heavy posts only to be driven back by yells and flaring torches and
volleys of blank cartridge.

Even a little boy could be of use there, and Toomai was as useful as
three boys. He would get his torch and wave it, and yell with the
best. But the really good time came when the driving out began, and the
Keddah--that is, the stockade--looked like a picture of the end of the
world, and men had to make signs to one another, because they could not
hear themselves speak. Then Little Toomai would climb up to the top of
one of the quivering stockade posts, his sun-bleached brown hair flying
loose all over his shoulders, and he looking like a goblin in the
torch-light. And as soon as there was a lull you could hear his
high-pitched yells of encouragement to Kala Nag, above the trumpeting
and crashing, and snapping of ropes, and groans of the tethered
elephants. “Mael, mael, Kala Nag! (Go on, go on, Black Snake!) Dant do!
(Give him the tusk!) Somalo! Somalo! (Careful, careful!) Maro! Mar! (Hit
him, hit him!) Mind the post! Arre! Arre! Hai! Yai! Kya-a-ah!” he would
shout, and the big fight between Kala Nag and the wild elephant would
sway to and fro across the Keddah, and the old elephant catchers would
wipe the sweat out of their eyes, and find time to nod to Little Toomai
wriggling with joy on the top of the posts.

He did more than wriggle. One night he slid down from the post and
slipped in between the elephants and threw up the loose end of a rope,
which had dropped, to a driver who was trying to get a purchase on
the leg of a kicking young calf (calves always give more trouble than
full-grown animals). Kala Nag saw him, caught him in his trunk, and
handed him up to Big Toomai, who slapped him then and there, and put him
back on the post.

Next morning he gave him a scolding and said, “Are not good brick
elephant lines and a little tent carrying enough, that thou must needs
go elephant catching on thy own account, little worthless? Now those
foolish hunters, whose pay is less than my pay, have spoken to Petersen
Sahib of the matter.” Little Toomai was frightened. He did not know much
of white men, but Petersen Sahib was the greatest white man in the world
to him. He was the head of all the Keddah operations--the man who caught
all the elephants for the Government of India, and who knew more about
the ways of elephants than any living man.

“What--what will happen?” said Little Toomai.

“Happen! The worst that can happen. Petersen Sahib is a madman. Else why
should he go hunting these wild devils? He may even require thee to be
an elephant catcher, to sleep anywhere in these fever-filled jungles,
and at last to be trampled to death in the Keddah. It is well that this
nonsense ends safely. Next week the catching is over, and we of the
plains are sent back to our stations. Then we will march on smooth
roads, and forget all this hunting. But, son, I am angry that thou
shouldst meddle in the business that belongs to these dirty Assamese
jungle folk. Kala Nag will obey none but me, so I must go with him into
the Keddah, but he is only a fighting elephant, and he does not help
to rope them. So I sit at my ease, as befits a mahout,--not a mere
hunter,--a mahout, I say, and a man who gets a pension at the end of
his service. Is the family of Toomai of the Elephants to be trodden
underfoot in the dirt of a Keddah? Bad one! Wicked one! Worthless son!
Go and wash Kala Nag and attend to his ears, and see that there are no
thorns in his feet. Or else Petersen Sahib will surely catch thee and
make thee a wild hunter--a follower of elephant’s foot tracks, a jungle
bear. Bah! Shame! Go!”

Little Toomai went off without saying a word, but he told Kala Nag all
his grievances while he was examining his feet. “No matter,” said Little
Toomai, turning up the fringe of Kala Nag’s huge right ear. “They
have said my name to Petersen Sahib, and perhaps--and perhaps--and
perhaps--who knows? Hai! That is a big thorn that I have pulled out!”

The next few days were spent in getting the elephants together, in
walking the newly caught wild elephants up and down between a couple of
tame ones to prevent them giving too much trouble on the downward march
to the plains, and in taking stock of the blankets and ropes and things
that had been worn out or lost in the forest.

Petersen Sahib came in on his clever she-elephant Pudmini; he had been
paying off other camps among the hills, for the season was coming to an
end, and there was a native clerk sitting at a table under a tree, to
pay the drivers their wages. As each man was paid he went back to his
elephant, and joined the line that stood ready to start. The catchers,
and hunters, and beaters, the men of the regular Keddah, who stayed in
the jungle year in and year out, sat on the backs of the elephants that
belonged to Petersen Sahib’s permanent force, or leaned against the
trees with their guns across their arms, and made fun of the drivers who
were going away, and laughed when the newly caught elephants broke the
line and ran about.

Big Toomai went up to the clerk with Little Toomai behind him, and
Machua Appa, the head tracker, said in an undertone to a friend of his,
“There goes one piece of good elephant stuff at least. ‘Tis a pity to
send that young jungle-cock to molt in the plains.”

Now Petersen Sahib had ears all over him, as a man must have who listens
to the most silent of all living things--the wild elephant. He turned
where he was lying all along on Pudmini’s back and said, “What is that?
I did not know of a man among the plains-drivers who had wit enough to
rope even a dead elephant.”

“This is not a man, but a boy. He went into the Keddah at the last
drive, and threw Barmao there the rope, when we were trying to get that
young calf with the blotch on his shoulder away from his mother.”

Machua Appa pointed at Little Toomai, and Petersen Sahib looked, and
Little Toomai bowed to the earth.

“He throw a rope? He is smaller than a picket-pin. Little one, what is
thy name?” said Petersen Sahib.

Little Toomai was too frightened to speak, but Kala Nag was behind him,
and Toomai made a sign with his hand, and the elephant caught him up in
his trunk and held him level with Pudmini’s forehead, in front of the
great Petersen Sahib. Then Little Toomai covered his face with his
hands, for he was only a child, and except where elephants were
concerned, he was just as bashful as a child could be.

“Oho!” said Petersen Sahib, smiling underneath his mustache, “and why
didst thou teach thy elephant that trick? Was it to help thee steal
green corn from the roofs of the houses when the ears are put out to
dry?”

“Not green corn, Protector of the Poor,--melons,” said Little Toomai,
and all the men sitting about broke into a roar of laughter. Most of
them had taught their elephants that trick when they were boys. Little
Toomai was hanging eight feet up in the air, and he wished very much
that he were eight feet underground.

“He is Toomai, my son, Sahib,” said Big Toomai, scowling. “He is a very
bad boy, and he will end in a jail, Sahib.”

“Of that I have my doubts,” said Petersen Sahib. “A boy who can face a
full Keddah at his age does not end in jails. See, little one, here are
four annas to spend in sweetmeats because thou hast a little head under
that great thatch of hair. In time thou mayest become a hunter too.” Big
Toomai scowled more than ever. “Remember, though, that Keddahs are not
good for children to play in,” Petersen Sahib went on.

“Must I never go there, Sahib?” asked Little Toomai with a big gasp.

“Yes.” Petersen Sahib smiled again. “When thou hast seen the elephants
dance. That is the proper time. Come to me when thou hast seen the
elephants dance, and then I will let thee go into all the Keddahs.”

There was another roar of laughter, for that is an old joke among
elephant-catchers, and it means just never. There are great cleared flat
places hidden away in the forests that are called elephants’ ball-rooms,
but even these are only found by accident, and no man has ever seen the
elephants dance. When a driver boasts of his skill and bravery the other
drivers say, “And when didst thou see the elephants dance?”

Kala Nag put Little Toomai down, and he bowed to the earth again and
went away with his father, and gave the silver four-anna piece to his
mother, who was nursing his baby brother, and they all were put up on
Kala Nag’s back, and the line of grunting, squealing elephants rolled
down the hill path to the plains. It was a very lively march on account
of the new elephants, who gave trouble at every ford, and needed coaxing
or beating every other minute.

Big Toomai prodded Kala Nag spitefully, for he was very angry, but
Little Toomai was too happy to speak. Petersen Sahib had noticed him,
and given him money, so he felt as a private soldier would feel if he
had been called out of the ranks and praised by his commander-in-chief.

“What did Petersen Sahib mean by the elephant dance?” he said, at last,
softly to his mother.

Big Toomai heard him and grunted. “That thou shouldst never be one of
these hill buffaloes of trackers. That was what he meant. Oh, you in
front, what is blocking the way?”

An Assamese driver, two or three elephants ahead, turned round angrily,
crying: “Bring up Kala Nag, and knock this youngster of mine into good
behavior. Why should Petersen Sahib have chosen me to go down with you
donkeys of the rice fields? Lay your beast alongside, Toomai, and
let him prod with his tusks. By all the Gods of the Hills, these new
elephants are possessed, or else they can smell their companions in the
jungle.” Kala Nag hit the new elephant in the ribs and knocked the
wind out of him, as Big Toomai said, “We have swept the hills of wild
elephants at the last catch. It is only your carelessness in driving.
Must I keep order along the whole line?”

“Hear him!” said the other driver. “We have swept the hills! Ho! Ho! You
are very wise, you plains people. Anyone but a mud-head who never saw
the jungle would know that they know that the drives are ended for the
season. Therefore all the wild elephants to-night will--but why should I
waste wisdom on a river-turtle?”

“What will they do?” Little Toomai called out.

“Ohe, little one. Art thou there? Well, I will tell thee, for thou hast
a cool head. They will dance, and it behooves thy father, who has
swept all the hills of all the elephants, to double-chain his pickets
to-night.”

“What talk is this?” said Big Toomai. “For forty years, father and son,
we have tended elephants, and we have never heard such moonshine about
dances.”

“Yes; but a plainsman who lives in a hut knows only the four walls
of his hut. Well, leave thy elephants unshackled tonight and see what
comes. As for their dancing, I have seen the place where--Bapree-bap!
How many windings has the Dihang River? Here is another ford, and we
must swim the calves. Stop still, you behind there.”

And in this way, talking and wrangling and splashing through the rivers,
they made their first march to a sort of receiving camp for the new
elephants. But they lost their tempers long before they got there.

Then the elephants were chained by their hind legs to their big stumps
of pickets, and extra ropes were fitted to the new elephants, and the
fodder was piled before them, and the hill drivers went back to Petersen
Sahib through the afternoon light, telling the plains drivers to be
extra careful that night, and laughing when the plains drivers asked the
reason.

Little Toomai attended to Kala Nag’s supper, and as evening fell,
wandered through the camp, unspeakably happy, in search of a tom-tom.
When an Indian child’s heart is full, he does not run about and make a
noise in an irregular fashion. He sits down to a sort of revel all by
himself. And Little Toomai had been spoken to by Petersen Sahib! If he
had not found what he wanted, I believe he would have been ill. But the
sweetmeat seller in the camp lent him a little tom-tom--a drum beaten
with the flat of the hand--and he sat down, cross-legged, before Kala
Nag as the stars began to come out, the tom-tom in his lap, and he
thumped and he thumped and he thumped, and the more he thought of the
great honor that had been done to him, the more he thumped, all alone
among the elephant fodder. There was no tune and no words, but the
thumping made him happy.

The new elephants strained at their ropes, and squealed and trumpeted
from time to time, and he could hear his mother in the camp hut putting
his small brother to sleep with an old, old song about the great God
Shiv, who once told all the animals what they should eat. It is a very
soothing lullaby, and the first verse says:

     Shiv, who poured the harvest and made the winds to blow,
     Sitting at the doorways of a day of long ago,
     Gave to each his portion, food and toil and fate,
     From the King upon the guddee to the Beggar at the gate.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
     Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all--
     Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
     And mother’s heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!

Little Toomai came in with a joyous tunk-a-tunk at the end of each
verse, till he felt sleepy and stretched himself on the fodder at Kala
Nag’s side. At last the elephants began to lie down one after another
as is their custom, till only Kala Nag at the right of the line was
left standing up; and he rocked slowly from side to side, his ears put
forward to listen to the night wind as it blew very slowly across the
hills. The air was full of all the night noises that, taken together,
make one big silence--the click of one bamboo stem against the other,
the rustle of something alive in the undergrowth, the scratch and squawk
of a half-waked bird (birds are awake in the night much more often than
we imagine), and the fall of water ever so far away. Little Toomai slept
for some time, and when he waked it was brilliant moonlight, and Kala
Nag was still standing up with his ears cocked. Little Toomai turned,
rustling in the fodder, and watched the curve of his big back against
half the stars in heaven, and while he watched he heard, so far away
that it sounded no more than a pinhole of noise pricked through the
stillness, the “hoot-toot” of a wild elephant.

All the elephants in the lines jumped up as if they had been shot, and
their grunts at last waked the sleeping mahouts, and they came out and
drove in the picket pegs with big mallets, and tightened this rope and
knotted that till all was quiet. One new elephant had nearly grubbed up
his picket, and Big Toomai took off Kala Nag’s leg chain and shackled
that elephant fore-foot to hind-foot, but slipped a loop of grass string
round Kala Nag’s leg, and told him to remember that he was tied fast. He
knew that he and his father and his grandfather had done the very same
thing hundreds of times before. Kala Nag did not answer to the order
by gurgling, as he usually did. He stood still, looking out across the
moonlight, his head a little raised and his ears spread like fans, up to
the great folds of the Garo hills.

“Tend to him if he grows restless in the night,” said Big Toomai to
Little Toomai, and he went into the hut and slept. Little Toomai was
just going to sleep, too, when he heard the coir string snap with a
little “tang,” and Kala Nag rolled out of his pickets as slowly and as
silently as a cloud rolls out of the mouth of a valley. Little Toomai
pattered after him, barefooted, down the road in the moonlight, calling
under his breath, “Kala Nag! Kala Nag! Take me with you, O Kala Nag!”
 The elephant turned, without a sound, took three strides back to the
boy in the moonlight, put down his trunk, swung him up to his neck,
and almost before Little Toomai had settled his knees, slipped into the
forest.

There was one blast of furious trumpeting from the lines, and then the
silence shut down on everything, and Kala Nag began to move. Sometimes
a tuft of high grass washed along his sides as a wave washes along the
sides of a ship, and sometimes a cluster of wild-pepper vines would
scrape along his back, or a bamboo would creak where his shoulder
touched it. But between those times he moved absolutely without any
sound, drifting through the thick Garo forest as though it had been
smoke. He was going uphill, but though Little Toomai watched the stars
in the rifts of the trees, he could not tell in what direction.

Then Kala Nag reached the crest of the ascent and stopped for a minute,
and Little Toomai could see the tops of the trees lying all speckled and
furry under the moonlight for miles and miles, and the blue-white mist
over the river in the hollow. Toomai leaned forward and looked, and he
felt that the forest was awake below him--awake and alive and crowded.
A big brown fruit-eating bat brushed past his ear; a porcupine’s quills
rattled in the thicket; and in the darkness between the tree stems he
heard a hog-bear digging hard in the moist warm earth, and snuffing as
it digged.

Then the branches closed over his head again, and Kala Nag began to go
down into the valley--not quietly this time, but as a runaway gun goes
down a steep bank--in one rush. The huge limbs moved as steadily as
pistons, eight feet to each stride, and the wrinkled skin of the elbow
points rustled. The undergrowth on either side of him ripped with a
noise like torn canvas, and the saplings that he heaved away right and
left with his shoulders sprang back again and banged him on the flank,
and great trails of creepers, all matted together, hung from his tusks
as he threw his head from side to side and plowed out his pathway. Then
Little Toomai laid himself down close to the great neck lest a swinging
bough should sweep him to the ground, and he wished that he were back in
the lines again.

The grass began to get squashy, and Kala Nag’s feet sucked and squelched
as he put them down, and the night mist at the bottom of the valley
chilled Little Toomai. There was a splash and a trample, and the rush of
running water, and Kala Nag strode through the bed of a river, feeling
his way at each step. Above the noise of the water, as it swirled round
the elephant’s legs, Little Toomai could hear more splashing and some
trumpeting both upstream and down--great grunts and angry snortings, and
all the mist about him seemed to be full of rolling, wavy shadows.

“Ai!” he said, half aloud, his teeth chattering. “The elephant-folk are
out tonight. It is the dance, then!”

Kala Nag swashed out of the water, blew his trunk clear, and began
another climb. But this time he was not alone, and he had not to make
his path. That was made already, six feet wide, in front of him, where
the bent jungle-grass was trying to recover itself and stand up. Many
elephants must have gone that way only a few minutes before. Little
Toomai looked back, and behind him a great wild tusker with his little
pig’s eyes glowing like hot coals was just lifting himself out of the
misty river. Then the trees closed up again, and they went on and up,
with trumpetings and crashings, and the sound of breaking branches on
every side of them.

At last Kala Nag stood still between two tree-trunks at the very top
of the hill. They were part of a circle of trees that grew round an
irregular space of some three or four acres, and in all that space, as
Little Toomai could see, the ground had been trampled down as hard as
a brick floor. Some trees grew in the center of the clearing, but their
bark was rubbed away, and the white wood beneath showed all shiny and
polished in the patches of moonlight. There were creepers hanging from
the upper branches, and the bells of the flowers of the creepers, great
waxy white things like convolvuluses, hung down fast asleep. But
within the limits of the clearing there was not a single blade of
green--nothing but the trampled earth.

The moonlight showed it all iron gray, except where some elephants
stood upon it, and their shadows were inky black. Little Toomai looked,
holding his breath, with his eyes starting out of his head, and as he
looked, more and more and more elephants swung out into the open from
between the tree trunks. Little Toomai could only count up to ten, and
he counted again and again on his fingers till he lost count of the
tens, and his head began to swim. Outside the clearing he could hear
them crashing in the undergrowth as they worked their way up the
hillside, but as soon as they were within the circle of the tree trunks
they moved like ghosts.

There were white-tusked wild males, with fallen leaves and nuts and
twigs lying in the wrinkles of their necks and the folds of their ears;
fat, slow-footed she-elephants, with restless, little pinky black
calves only three or four feet high running under their stomachs; young
elephants with their tusks just beginning to show, and very proud of
them; lanky, scraggy old-maid elephants, with their hollow anxious
faces, and trunks like rough bark; savage old bull elephants, scarred
from shoulder to flank with great weals and cuts of bygone fights,
and the caked dirt of their solitary mud baths dropping from their
shoulders; and there was one with a broken tusk and the marks of the
full-stroke, the terrible drawing scrape, of a tiger’s claws on his
side.

They were standing head to head, or walking to and fro across the ground
in couples, or rocking and swaying all by themselves--scores and scores
of elephants.

Toomai knew that so long as he lay still on Kala Nag’s neck nothing
would happen to him, for even in the rush and scramble of a Keddah drive
a wild elephant does not reach up with his trunk and drag a man off the
neck of a tame elephant. And these elephants were not thinking of men
that night. Once they started and put their ears forward when they heard
the chinking of a leg iron in the forest, but it was Pudmini, Petersen
Sahib’s pet elephant, her chain snapped short off, grunting, snuffling
up the hillside. She must have broken her pickets and come straight from
Petersen Sahib’s camp; and Little Toomai saw another elephant, one that
he did not know, with deep rope galls on his back and breast. He, too,
must have run away from some camp in the hills about.

At last there was no sound of any more elephants moving in the forest,
and Kala Nag rolled out from his station between the trees and went into
the middle of the crowd, clucking and gurgling, and all the elephants
began to talk in their own tongue, and to move about.

Still lying down, Little Toomai looked down upon scores and scores of
broad backs, and wagging ears, and tossing trunks, and little rolling
eyes. He heard the click of tusks as they crossed other tusks by
accident, and the dry rustle of trunks twined together, and the chafing
of enormous sides and shoulders in the crowd, and the incessant flick
and hissh of the great tails. Then a cloud came over the moon, and he
sat in black darkness. But the quiet, steady hustling and pushing and
gurgling went on just the same. He knew that there were elephants all
round Kala Nag, and that there was no chance of backing him out of the
assembly; so he set his teeth and shivered. In a Keddah at least there
was torchlight and shouting, but here he was all alone in the dark, and
once a trunk came up and touched him on the knee.

Then an elephant trumpeted, and they all took it up for five or ten
terrible seconds. The dew from the trees above spattered down like rain
on the unseen backs, and a dull booming noise began, not very loud at
first, and Little Toomai could not tell what it was. But it grew and
grew, and Kala Nag lifted up one forefoot and then the other, and
brought them down on the ground--one-two, one-two, as steadily as
trip-hammers. The elephants were stamping all together now, and it
sounded like a war drum beaten at the mouth of a cave. The dew fell from
the trees till there was no more left to fall, and the booming went on,
and the ground rocked and shivered, and Little Toomai put his hands up
to his ears to shut out the sound. But it was all one gigantic jar that
ran through him--this stamp of hundreds of heavy feet on the raw earth.
Once or twice he could feel Kala Nag and all the others surge forward
a few strides, and the thumping would change to the crushing sound of
juicy green things being bruised, but in a minute or two the boom
of feet on hard earth began again. A tree was creaking and groaning
somewhere near him. He put out his arm and felt the bark, but Kala Nag
moved forward, still tramping, and he could not tell where he was in the
clearing. There was no sound from the elephants, except once, when two
or three little calves squeaked together. Then he heard a thump and a
shuffle, and the booming went on. It must have lasted fully two hours,
and Little Toomai ached in every nerve, but he knew by the smell of the
night air that the dawn was coming.

The morning broke in one sheet of pale yellow behind the green hills,
and the booming stopped with the first ray, as though the light had
been an order. Before Little Toomai had got the ringing out of his head,
before even he had shifted his position, there was not an elephant in
sight except Kala Nag, Pudmini, and the elephant with the rope-galls,
and there was neither sign nor rustle nor whisper down the hillsides to
show where the others had gone.

Little Toomai stared again and again. The clearing, as he remembered it,
had grown in the night. More trees stood in the middle of it, but the
undergrowth and the jungle grass at the sides had been rolled back.
Little Toomai stared once more. Now he understood the trampling. The
elephants had stamped out more room--had stamped the thick grass and
juicy cane to trash, the trash into slivers, the slivers into tiny
fibers, and the fibers into hard earth.

“Wah!” said Little Toomai, and his eyes were very heavy. “Kala Nag, my
lord, let us keep by Pudmini and go to Petersen Sahib’s camp, or I shall
drop from thy neck.”

The third elephant watched the two go away, snorted, wheeled round, and
took his own path. He may have belonged to some little native king’s
establishment, fifty or sixty or a hundred miles away.

Two hours later, as Petersen Sahib was eating early breakfast, his
elephants, who had been double chained that night, began to trumpet, and
Pudmini, mired to the shoulders, with Kala Nag, very footsore, shambled
into the camp. Little Toomai’s face was gray and pinched, and his
hair was full of leaves and drenched with dew, but he tried to salute
Petersen Sahib, and cried faintly: “The dance--the elephant dance! I
have seen it, and--I die!” As Kala Nag sat down, he slid off his neck in
a dead faint.

But, since native children have no nerves worth speaking of, in two
hours he was lying very contentedly in Petersen Sahib’s hammock with
Petersen Sahib’s shooting-coat under his head, and a glass of warm milk,
a little brandy, with a dash of quinine, inside of him, and while the
old hairy, scarred hunters of the jungles sat three deep before him,
looking at him as though he were a spirit, he told his tale in short
words, as a child will, and wound up with:

“Now, if I lie in one word, send men to see, and they will find that the
elephant folk have trampled down more room in their dance-room, and
they will find ten and ten, and many times ten, tracks leading to that
dance-room. They made more room with their feet. I have seen it. Kala
Nag took me, and I saw. Also Kala Nag is very leg-weary!”

Little Toomai lay back and slept all through the long afternoon and into
the twilight, and while he slept Petersen Sahib and Machua Appa followed
the track of the two elephants for fifteen miles across the hills.
Petersen Sahib had spent eighteen years in catching elephants, and he
had only once before found such a dance-place. Machua Appa had no need
to look twice at the clearing to see what had been done there, or to
scratch with his toe in the packed, rammed earth.

“The child speaks truth,” said he. “All this was done last night, and
I have counted seventy tracks crossing the river. See, Sahib, where
Pudmini’s leg-iron cut the bark of that tree! Yes; she was there too.”

They looked at one another and up and down, and they wondered. For the
ways of elephants are beyond the wit of any man, black or white, to
fathom.

“Forty years and five,” said Machua Appa, “have I followed my lord, the
elephant, but never have I heard that any child of man had seen what
this child has seen. By all the Gods of the Hills, it is--what can we
say?” and he shook his head.

When they got back to camp it was time for the evening meal. Petersen
Sahib ate alone in his tent, but he gave orders that the camp should
have two sheep and some fowls, as well as a double ration of flour and
rice and salt, for he knew that there would be a feast.

Big Toomai had come up hotfoot from the camp in the plains to search for
his son and his elephant, and now that he had found them he looked at
them as though he were afraid of them both. And there was a feast by
the blazing campfires in front of the lines of picketed elephants,
and Little Toomai was the hero of it all. And the big brown elephant
catchers, the trackers and drivers and ropers, and the men who know all
the secrets of breaking the wildest elephants, passed him from one to
the other, and they marked his forehead with blood from the breast of a
newly killed jungle-cock, to show that he was a forester, initiated and
free of all the jungles.

And at last, when the flames died down, and the red light of the logs
made the elephants look as though they had been dipped in blood too,
Machua Appa, the head of all the drivers of all the Keddahs--Machua
Appa, Petersen Sahib’s other self, who had never seen a made road in
forty years: Machua Appa, who was so great that he had no other name
than Machua Appa,--leaped to his feet, with Little Toomai held high in
the air above his head, and shouted: “Listen, my brothers. Listen, too,
you my lords in the lines there, for I, Machua Appa, am speaking! This
little one shall no more be called Little Toomai, but Toomai of the
Elephants, as his great-grandfather was called before him. What never
man has seen he has seen through the long night, and the favor of the
elephant-folk and of the Gods of the Jungles is with him. He shall
become a great tracker. He shall become greater than I, even I, Machua
Appa! He shall follow the new trail, and the stale trail, and the mixed
trail, with a clear eye! He shall take no harm in the Keddah when he
runs under their bellies to rope the wild tuskers; and if he slips
before the feet of the charging bull elephant, the bull elephant
shall know who he is and shall not crush him. Aihai! my lords in the
chains,”--he whirled up the line of pickets--“here is the little one
that has seen your dances in your hidden places,--the sight that never
man saw! Give him honor, my lords! Salaam karo, my children. Make your
salute to Toomai of the Elephants! Gunga Pershad, ahaa! Hira Guj, Birchi
Guj, Kuttar Guj, ahaa! Pudmini,--thou hast seen him at the dance, and
thou too, Kala Nag, my pearl among elephants!--ahaa! Together! To Toomai
of the Elephants. Barrao!”

And at that last wild yell the whole line flung up their trunks till the
tips touched their foreheads, and broke out into the full salute--the
crashing trumpet-peal that only the Viceroy of India hears, the Salaamut
of the Keddah.

But it was all for the sake of Little Toomai, who had seen what never
man had seen before--the dance of the elephants at night and alone in
the heart of the Garo hills!




Shiv and the Grasshopper

     (The song that Toomai’s mother sang to the baby)

     Shiv, who poured the harvest and made the winds to blow,
     Sitting at the doorways of a day of long ago,
     Gave to each his portion, food and toil and fate,
     From the King upon the guddee to the Beggar at the gate.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother’s heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!


     Wheat he gave to rich folk, millet to the poor,
     Broken scraps for holy men that beg from door to door;
     Battle to the tiger, carrion to the kite,
     And rags and bones to wicked wolves without the wall at night.
     Naught he found too lofty, none he saw too low--
     Parbati beside him watched them come and go;
     Thought to cheat her husband, turning Shiv to jest--
     Stole the little grasshopper and hid it in her breast.
        So she tricked him, Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  Turn and see.
        Tall are the camels, heavy are the kine,
        But this was Least of Little Things, O little son of mine!

     When the dole was ended, laughingly she said,
     “Master, of a million mouths, is not one unfed?”
      Laughing, Shiv made answer, “All have had their part,
     Even he, the little one, hidden ‘neath thy heart.”
      From her breast she plucked it, Parbati the thief,
     Saw the Least of Little Things gnawed a new-grown leaf!
     Saw and feared and wondered, making prayer to Shiv,
     Who hath surely given meat to all that live.
        All things made he--Shiva the Preserver.
        Mahadeo!  Mahadeo!  He made all,--
        Thorn for the camel, fodder for the kine,
        And mother’s heart for sleepy head, O little son of mine!




Her Majesty’s Servants

     You can work it out by Fractions or by simple Rule of Three,
     But the way of Tweedle-dum is not the way of Tweedle-dee.
     You can twist it, you can turn it, you can plait it till you drop,
     But the way of Pilly Winky’s not the way of Winkie Pop!

It had been raining heavily for one whole month--raining on a camp
of thirty thousand men and thousands of camels, elephants, horses,
bullocks, and mules all gathered together at a place called Rawal Pindi,
to be reviewed by the Viceroy of India. He was receiving a visit from
the Amir of Afghanistan--a wild king of a very wild country. The Amir
had brought with him for a bodyguard eight hundred men and horses who
had never seen a camp or a locomotive before in their lives--savage
men and savage horses from somewhere at the back of Central Asia. Every
night a mob of these horses would be sure to break their heel ropes and
stampede up and down the camp through the mud in the dark, or the camels
would break loose and run about and fall over the ropes of the tents,
and you can imagine how pleasant that was for men trying to go to sleep.
My tent lay far away from the camel lines, and I thought it was safe.
But one night a man popped his head in and shouted, “Get out, quick!
They’re coming! My tent’s gone!”

I knew who “they” were, so I put on my boots and waterproof and scuttled
out into the slush. Little Vixen, my fox terrier, went out through the
other side; and then there was a roaring and a grunting and bubbling,
and I saw the tent cave in, as the pole snapped, and begin to dance
about like a mad ghost. A camel had blundered into it, and wet and angry
as I was, I could not help laughing. Then I ran on, because I did not
know how many camels might have got loose, and before long I was out of
sight of the camp, plowing my way through the mud.

At last I fell over the tail-end of a gun, and by that knew I was
somewhere near the artillery lines where the cannon were stacked at
night. As I did not want to plowter about any more in the drizzle and
the dark, I put my waterproof over the muzzle of one gun, and made a
sort of wigwam with two or three rammers that I found, and lay along the
tail of another gun, wondering where Vixen had got to, and where I might
be.

Just as I was getting ready to go to sleep I heard a jingle of harness
and a grunt, and a mule passed me shaking his wet ears. He belonged to
a screw-gun battery, for I could hear the rattle of the straps and rings
and chains and things on his saddle pad. The screw-guns are tiny little
cannon made in two pieces, that are screwed together when the time comes
to use them. They are taken up mountains, anywhere that a mule can find
a road, and they are very useful for fighting in rocky country.

Behind the mule there was a camel, with his big soft feet squelching
and slipping in the mud, and his neck bobbing to and fro like a
strayed hen’s. Luckily, I knew enough of beast language--not wild-beast
language, but camp-beast language, of course--from the natives to know
what he was saying.

He must have been the one that flopped into my tent, for he called to
the mule, “What shall I do? Where shall I go? I have fought with a white
thing that waved, and it took a stick and hit me on the neck.” (That was
my broken tent pole, and I was very glad to know it.) “Shall we run on?”

“Oh, it was you,” said the mule, “you and your friends, that have
been disturbing the camp? All right. You’ll be beaten for this in the
morning. But I may as well give you something on account now.”

I heard the harness jingle as the mule backed and caught the camel
two kicks in the ribs that rang like a drum. “Another time,” he said,
“you’ll know better than to run through a mule battery at night,
shouting `Thieves and fire!’ Sit down, and keep your silly neck quiet.”

The camel doubled up camel-fashion, like a two-foot rule, and sat down
whimpering. There was a regular beat of hoofs in the darkness, and a big
troop-horse cantered up as steadily as though he were on parade, jumped
a gun tail, and landed close to the mule.

“It’s disgraceful,” he said, blowing out his nostrils. “Those camels
have racketed through our lines again--the third time this week. How’s a
horse to keep his condition if he isn’t allowed to sleep. Who’s here?”

“I’m the breech-piece mule of number two gun of the First Screw
Battery,” said the mule, “and the other’s one of your friends. He’s
waked me up too. Who are you?”

“Number Fifteen, E troop, Ninth Lancers--Dick Cunliffe’s horse. Stand
over a little, there.”

“Oh, beg your pardon,” said the mule. “It’s too dark to see much. Aren’t
these camels too sickening for anything? I walked out of my lines to get
a little peace and quiet here.”

“My lords,” said the camel humbly, “we dreamed bad dreams in the night,
and we were very much afraid. I am only a baggage camel of the 39th
Native Infantry, and I am not as brave as you are, my lords.”

“Then why didn’t you stay and carry baggage for the 39th Native
Infantry, instead of running all round the camp?” said the mule.

“They were such very bad dreams,” said the camel. “I am sorry. Listen!
What is that? Shall we run on again?”

“Sit down,” said the mule, “or you’ll snap your long stick-legs between
the guns.” He cocked one ear and listened. “Bullocks!” he said. “Gun
bullocks. On my word, you and your friends have waked the camp very
thoroughly. It takes a good deal of prodding to put up a gun-bullock.”

I heard a chain dragging along the ground, and a yoke of the great sulky
white bullocks that drag the heavy siege guns when the elephants won’t
go any nearer to the firing, came shouldering along together. And almost
stepping on the chain was another battery mule, calling wildly for
“Billy.”

“That’s one of our recruits,” said the old mule to the troop horse.
“He’s calling for me. Here, youngster, stop squealing. The dark never
hurt anybody yet.”

The gun-bullocks lay down together and began chewing the cud, but the
young mule huddled close to Billy.

“Things!” he said. “Fearful and horrible, Billy! They came into our
lines while we were asleep. D’you think they’ll kill us?”

“I’ve a very great mind to give you a number-one kicking,” said Billy.
“The idea of a fourteen-hand mule with your training disgracing the
battery before this gentleman!”

“Gently, gently!” said the troop-horse. “Remember they are always like
this to begin with. The first time I ever saw a man (it was in Australia
when I was a three-year-old) I ran for half a day, and if I’d seen a
camel, I should have been running still.”

Nearly all our horses for the English cavalry are brought to India from
Australia, and are broken in by the troopers themselves.

“True enough,” said Billy. “Stop shaking, youngster. The first time
they put the full harness with all its chains on my back I stood on
my forelegs and kicked every bit of it off. I hadn’t learned the real
science of kicking then, but the battery said they had never seen
anything like it.”

“But this wasn’t harness or anything that jingled,” said the young mule.
“You know I don’t mind that now, Billy. It was Things like trees, and
they fell up and down the lines and bubbled; and my head-rope broke, and
I couldn’t find my driver, and I couldn’t find you, Billy, so I ran off
with--with these gentlemen.”

“H’m!” said Billy. “As soon as I heard the camels were loose I came away
on my own account. When a battery--a screw-gun mule calls gun-bullocks
gentlemen, he must be very badly shaken up. Who are you fellows on the
ground there?”

The gun bullocks rolled their cuds, and answered both together: “The
seventh yoke of the first gun of the Big Gun Battery. We were asleep
when the camels came, but when we were trampled on we got up and walked
away. It is better to lie quiet in the mud than to be disturbed on good
bedding. We told your friend here that there was nothing to be afraid
of, but he knew so much that he thought otherwise. Wah!”

They went on chewing.

“That comes of being afraid,” said Billy. “You get laughed at by
gun-bullocks. I hope you like it, young un.”

The young mule’s teeth snapped, and I heard him say something about not
being afraid of any beefy old bullock in the world. But the bullocks
only clicked their horns together and went on chewing.

“Now, don’t be angry after you’ve been afraid. That’s the worst kind
of cowardice,” said the troop-horse. “Anybody can be forgiven for being
scared in the night, I think, if they see things they don’t understand.
We’ve broken out of our pickets, again and again, four hundred and fifty
of us, just because a new recruit got to telling tales of whip snakes at
home in Australia till we were scared to death of the loose ends of our
head-ropes.”

“That’s all very well in camp,” said Billy. “I’m not above stampeding
myself, for the fun of the thing, when I haven’t been out for a day or
two. But what do you do on active service?”

“Oh, that’s quite another set of new shoes,” said the troop horse. “Dick
Cunliffe’s on my back then, and drives his knees into me, and all I have
to do is to watch where I am putting my feet, and to keep my hind legs
well under me, and be bridle-wise.”

“What’s bridle-wise?” said the young mule.

“By the Blue Gums of the Back Blocks,” snorted the troop-horse, “do you
mean to say that you aren’t taught to be bridle-wise in your business?
How can you do anything, unless you can spin round at once when the
rein is pressed on your neck? It means life or death to your man, and of
course that’s life and death to you. Get round with your hind legs under
you the instant you feel the rein on your neck. If you haven’t room to
swing round, rear up a little and come round on your hind legs. That’s
being bridle-wise.”

“We aren’t taught that way,” said Billy the mule stiffly. “We’re taught
to obey the man at our head: step off when he says so, and step in when
he says so. I suppose it comes to the same thing. Now, with all this
fine fancy business and rearing, which must be very bad for your hocks,
what do you do?”

“That depends,” said the troop-horse. “Generally I have to go in among a
lot of yelling, hairy men with knives--long shiny knives, worse than
the farrier’s knives--and I have to take care that Dick’s boot is just
touching the next man’s boot without crushing it. I can see Dick’s lance
to the right of my right eye, and I know I’m safe. I shouldn’t care to
be the man or horse that stood up to Dick and me when we’re in a hurry.”

“Don’t the knives hurt?” said the young mule.

“Well, I got one cut across the chest once, but that wasn’t Dick’s
fault--”

“A lot I should have cared whose fault it was, if it hurt!” said the
young mule.

“You must,” said the troop horse. “If you don’t trust your man, you may
as well run away at once. That’s what some of our horses do, and I don’t
blame them. As I was saying, it wasn’t Dick’s fault. The man was lying
on the ground, and I stretched myself not to tread on him, and he
slashed up at me. Next time I have to go over a man lying down I shall
step on him--hard.”

“H’m!” said Billy. “It sounds very foolish. Knives are dirty things
at any time. The proper thing to do is to climb up a mountain with a
well-balanced saddle, hang on by all four feet and your ears too, and
creep and crawl and wriggle along, till you come out hundreds of feet
above anyone else on a ledge where there’s just room enough for your
hoofs. Then you stand still and keep quiet--never ask a man to hold your
head, young un--keep quiet while the guns are being put together, and
then you watch the little poppy shells drop down into the tree-tops ever
so far below.”

“Don’t you ever trip?” said the troop-horse.

“They say that when a mule trips you can split a hen’s ear,” said Billy.
“Now and again perhaps a badly packed saddle will upset a mule, but it’s
very seldom. I wish I could show you our business. It’s beautiful. Why,
it took me three years to find out what the men were driving at. The
science of the thing is never to show up against the sky line, because,
if you do, you may get fired at. Remember that, young un. Always keep
hidden as much as possible, even if you have to go a mile out of your
way. I lead the battery when it comes to that sort of climbing.”

“Fired at without the chance of running into the people who are firing!”
 said the troop-horse, thinking hard. “I couldn’t stand that. I should
want to charge--with Dick.”

“Oh, no, you wouldn’t. You know that as soon as the guns are in
position they’ll do all the charging. That’s scientific and neat. But
knives--pah!”

The baggage-camel had been bobbing his head to and fro for some time
past, anxious to get a word in edgewise. Then I heard him say, as he
cleared his throat, nervously:

“I--I--I have fought a little, but not in that climbing way or that
running way.”

“No. Now you mention it,” said Billy, “you don’t look as though you were
made for climbing or running--much. Well, how was it, old Hay-bales?”

“The proper way,” said the camel. “We all sat down--”

“Oh, my crupper and breastplate!” said the troop-horse under his breath.
“Sat down!”

“We sat down--a hundred of us,” the camel went on, “in a big square, and
the men piled our packs and saddles, outside the square, and they fired
over our backs, the men did, on all sides of the square.”

“What sort of men? Any men that came along?” said the troop-horse. “They
teach us in riding school to lie down and let our masters fire across
us, but Dick Cunliffe is the only man I’d trust to do that. It tickles
my girths, and, besides, I can’t see with my head on the ground.”

“What does it matter who fires across you?” said the camel. “There are
plenty of men and plenty of other camels close by, and a great many
clouds of smoke. I am not frightened then. I sit still and wait.”

“And yet,” said Billy, “you dream bad dreams and upset the camp at
night. Well, well! Before I’d lie down, not to speak of sitting down,
and let a man fire across me, my heels and his head would have something
to say to each other. Did you ever hear anything so awful as that?”

There was a long silence, and then one of the gun bullocks lifted up his
big head and said, “This is very foolish indeed. There is only one way
of fighting.”

“Oh, go on,” said Billy. “Please don’t mind me. I suppose you fellows
fight standing on your tails?”

“Only one way,” said the two together. (They must have been twins.)
“This is that way. To put all twenty yoke of us to the big gun as soon
as Two Tails trumpets.” (“Two Tails” is camp slang for the elephant.)

“What does Two Tails trumpet for?” said the young mule.

“To show that he is not going any nearer to the smoke on the other
side. Two Tails is a great coward. Then we tug the big gun all
together--Heya--Hullah! Heeyah! Hullah! We do not climb like cats nor
run like calves. We go across the level plain, twenty yoke of us, till
we are unyoked again, and we graze while the big guns talk across the
plain to some town with mud walls, and pieces of the wall fall out, and
the dust goes up as though many cattle were coming home.”

“Oh! And you choose that time for grazing?” said the young mule.

“That time or any other. Eating is always good. We eat till we are yoked
up again and tug the gun back to where Two Tails is waiting for it.
Sometimes there are big guns in the city that speak back, and some of
us are killed, and then there is all the more grazing for those that are
left. This is Fate. None the less, Two Tails is a great coward. That is
the proper way to fight. We are brothers from Hapur. Our father was a
sacred bull of Shiva. We have spoken.”

“Well, I’ve certainly learned something tonight,” said the troop-horse.
“Do you gentlemen of the screw-gun battery feel inclined to eat when you
are being fired at with big guns, and Two Tails is behind you?”

“About as much as we feel inclined to sit down and let men sprawl all
over us, or run into people with knives. I never heard such stuff. A
mountain ledge, a well-balanced load, a driver you can trust to let you
pick your own way, and I’m your mule. But--the other things--no!” said
Billy, with a stamp of his foot.

“Of course,” said the troop horse, “everyone is not made in the same
way, and I can quite see that your family, on your father’s side, would
fail to understand a great many things.”

“Never you mind my family on my father’s side,” said Billy angrily, for
every mule hates to be reminded that his father was a donkey. “My father
was a Southern gentleman, and he could pull down and bite and kick into
rags every horse he came across. Remember that, you big brown Brumby!”

Brumby means wild horse without any breeding. Imagine the feelings of
Sunol if a car-horse called her a “skate,” and you can imagine how the
Australian horse felt. I saw the white of his eye glitter in the dark.

“See here, you son of an imported Malaga jackass,” he said between
his teeth, “I’d have you know that I’m related on my mother’s side to
Carbine, winner of the Melbourne Cup, and where I come from we aren’t
accustomed to being ridden over roughshod by any parrot-mouthed,
pig-headed mule in a pop-gun pea-shooter battery. Are you ready?”

“On your hind legs!” squealed Billy. They both reared up facing each
other, and I was expecting a furious fight, when a gurgly, rumbly
voice, called out of the darkness to the right--“Children, what are you
fighting about there? Be quiet.”

Both beasts dropped down with a snort of disgust, for neither horse nor
mule can bear to listen to an elephant’s voice.

“It’s Two Tails!” said the troop-horse. “I can’t stand him. A tail at
each end isn’t fair!”

“My feelings exactly,” said Billy, crowding into the troop-horse for
company. “We’re very alike in some things.”

“I suppose we’ve inherited them from our mothers,” said the troop horse.
“It’s not worth quarreling about. Hi! Two Tails, are you tied up?”

“Yes,” said Two Tails, with a laugh all up his trunk. “I’m picketed for
the night. I’ve heard what you fellows have been saying. But don’t be
afraid. I’m not coming over.”

The bullocks and the camel said, half aloud, “Afraid of Two Tails--what
nonsense!” And the bullocks went on, “We are sorry that you heard, but
it is true. Two Tails, why are you afraid of the guns when they fire?”

“Well,” said Two Tails, rubbing one hind leg against the other, exactly
like a little boy saying a poem, “I don’t quite know whether you’d
understand.”

“We don’t, but we have to pull the guns,” said the bullocks.

“I know it, and I know you are a good deal braver than you think
you are. But it’s different with me. My battery captain called me a
Pachydermatous Anachronism the other day.”

“That’s another way of fighting, I suppose?” said Billy, who was
recovering his spirits.

“You don’t know what that means, of course, but I do. It means betwixt
and between, and that is just where I am. I can see inside my head what
will happen when a shell bursts, and you bullocks can’t.”

“I can,” said the troop-horse. “At least a little bit. I try not to
think about it.”

“I can see more than you, and I do think about it. I know there’s a
great deal of me to take care of, and I know that nobody knows how to
cure me when I’m sick. All they can do is to stop my driver’s pay till I
get well, and I can’t trust my driver.”

“Ah!” said the troop horse. “That explains it. I can trust Dick.”

“You could put a whole regiment of Dicks on my back without making me
feel any better. I know just enough to be uncomfortable, and not enough
to go on in spite of it.”

“We do not understand,” said the bullocks.

“I know you don’t. I’m not talking to you. You don’t know what blood
is.”

“We do,” said the bullocks. “It is red stuff that soaks into the ground
and smells.”

The troop-horse gave a kick and a bound and a snort.

“Don’t talk of it,” he said. “I can smell it now, just thinking of it.
It makes me want to run--when I haven’t Dick on my back.”

“But it is not here,” said the camel and the bullocks. “Why are you so
stupid?”

“It’s vile stuff,” said Billy. “I don’t want to run, but I don’t want to
talk about it.”

“There you are!” said Two Tails, waving his tail to explain.

“Surely. Yes, we have been here all night,” said the bullocks.

Two Tails stamped his foot till the iron ring on it jingled. “Oh, I’m
not talking to you. You can’t see inside your heads.”

“No. We see out of our four eyes,” said the bullocks. “We see straight
in front of us.”

“If I could do that and nothing else, you wouldn’t be needed to pull the
big guns at all. If I was like my captain--he can see things inside his
head before the firing begins, and he shakes all over, but he knows too
much to run away--if I was like him I could pull the guns. But if I were
as wise as all that I should never be here. I should be a king in the
forest, as I used to be, sleeping half the day and bathing when I liked.
I haven’t had a good bath for a month.”

“That’s all very fine,” said Billy. “But giving a thing a long name
doesn’t make it any better.”

“H’sh!” said the troop horse. “I think I understand what Two Tails
means.”

“You’ll understand better in a minute,” said Two Tails angrily. “Now you
just explain to me why you don’t like this!”

He began trumpeting furiously at the top of his trumpet.

“Stop that!” said Billy and the troop horse together, and I could
hear them stamp and shiver. An elephant’s trumpeting is always nasty,
especially on a dark night.

“I shan’t stop,” said Two Tails. “Won’t you explain that, please?
Hhrrmph! Rrrt! Rrrmph! Rrrhha!” Then he stopped suddenly, and I heard
a little whimper in the dark, and knew that Vixen had found me at last.
She knew as well as I did that if there is one thing in the world the
elephant is more afraid of than another it is a little barking dog. So
she stopped to bully Two Tails in his pickets, and yapped round his big
feet. Two Tails shuffled and squeaked. “Go away, little dog!” he said.
“Don’t snuff at my ankles, or I’ll kick at you. Good little dog--nice
little doggie, then! Go home, you yelping little beast! Oh, why doesn’t
someone take her away? She’ll bite me in a minute.”

“Seems to me,” said Billy to the troop horse, “that our friend Two Tails
is afraid of most things. Now, if I had a full meal for every dog I’ve
kicked across the parade-ground I should be as fat as Two Tails nearly.”

I whistled, and Vixen ran up to me, muddy all over, and licked my nose,
and told me a long tale about hunting for me all through the camp. I
never let her know that I understood beast talk, or she would have
taken all sorts of liberties. So I buttoned her into the breast of my
overcoat, and Two Tails shuffled and stamped and growled to himself.

“Extraordinary! Most extraordinary!” he said. “It runs in our family.
Now, where has that nasty little beast gone to?”

I heard him feeling about with his trunk.

“We all seem to be affected in various ways,” he went on, blowing his
nose. “Now, you gentlemen were alarmed, I believe, when I trumpeted.”

“Not alarmed, exactly,” said the troop-horse, “but it made me feel as
though I had hornets where my saddle ought to be. Don’t begin again.”

“I’m frightened of a little dog, and the camel here is frightened by bad
dreams in the night.”

“It is very lucky for us that we haven’t all got to fight in the same
way,” said the troop-horse.

“What I want to know,” said the young mule, who had been quiet for a
long time--“what I want to know is, why we have to fight at all.”

“Because we’re told to,” said the troop-horse, with a snort of contempt.

“Orders,” said Billy the mule, and his teeth snapped.

“Hukm hai!” (It is an order!), said the camel with a gurgle, and Two
Tails and the bullocks repeated, “Hukm hai!”

“Yes, but who gives the orders?” said the recruit-mule.

“The man who walks at your head--Or sits on your back--Or holds the nose
rope--Or twists your tail,” said Billy and the troop-horse and the camel
and the bullocks one after the other.

“But who gives them the orders?”

“Now you want to know too much, young un,” said Billy, “and that is one
way of getting kicked. All you have to do is to obey the man at your
head and ask no questions.”

“He’s quite right,” said Two Tails. “I can’t always obey, because I’m
betwixt and between. But Billy’s right. Obey the man next to you who
gives the order, or you’ll stop all the battery, besides getting a
thrashing.”

The gun-bullocks got up to go. “Morning is coming,” they said. “We will
go back to our lines. It is true that we only see out of our eyes, and
we are not very clever. But still, we are the only people to-night who
have not been afraid. Good-night, you brave people.”

Nobody answered, and the troop-horse said, to change the conversation,
“Where’s that little dog? A dog means a man somewhere about.”

“Here I am,” yapped Vixen, “under the gun tail with my man. You big,
blundering beast of a camel you, you upset our tent. My man’s very
angry.”

“Phew!” said the bullocks. “He must be white!”

“Of course he is,” said Vixen. “Do you suppose I’m looked after by a
black bullock-driver?”

“Huah! Ouach! Ugh!” said the bullocks. “Let us get away quickly.”

They plunged forward in the mud, and managed somehow to run their yoke
on the pole of an ammunition wagon, where it jammed.

“Now you have done it,” said Billy calmly. “Don’t struggle. You’re hung
up till daylight. What on earth’s the matter?”

The bullocks went off into the long hissing snorts that Indian cattle
give, and pushed and crowded and slued and stamped and slipped and
nearly fell down in the mud, grunting savagely.

“You’ll break your necks in a minute,” said the troop-horse. “What’s the
matter with white men? I live with ‘em.”

“They--eat--us! Pull!” said the near bullock. The yoke snapped with a
twang, and they lumbered off together.

I never knew before what made Indian cattle so scared of Englishmen.
We eat beef--a thing that no cattle-driver touches--and of course the
cattle do not like it.

“May I be flogged with my own pad-chains! Who’d have thought of two big
lumps like those losing their heads?” said Billy.

“Never mind. I’m going to look at this man. Most of the white men, I
know, have things in their pockets,” said the troop-horse.

“I’ll leave you, then. I can’t say I’m over-fond of ‘em myself. Besides,
white men who haven’t a place to sleep in are more than likely to be
thieves, and I’ve a good deal of Government property on my back. Come
along, young un, and we’ll go back to our lines. Good-night, Australia!
See you on parade to-morrow, I suppose. Good-night, old Hay-bale!--try
to control your feelings, won’t you? Good-night, Two Tails! If you pass
us on the ground tomorrow, don’t trumpet. It spoils our formation.”

Billy the Mule stumped off with the swaggering limp of an old
campaigner, as the troop-horse’s head came nuzzling into my breast, and
I gave him biscuits, while Vixen, who is a most conceited little dog,
told him fibs about the scores of horses that she and I kept.

“I’m coming to the parade to-morrow in my dog-cart,” she said. “Where
will you be?”

“On the left hand of the second squadron. I set the time for all my
troop, little lady,” he said politely. “Now I must go back to Dick. My
tail’s all muddy, and he’ll have two hours’ hard work dressing me for
parade.”

The big parade of all the thirty thousand men was held that afternoon,
and Vixen and I had a good place close to the Viceroy and the Amir of
Afghanistan, with high, big black hat of astrakhan wool and the great
diamond star in the center. The first part of the review was all
sunshine, and the regiments went by in wave upon wave of legs all moving
together, and guns all in a line, till our eyes grew dizzy. Then the
cavalry came up, to the beautiful cavalry canter of “Bonnie Dundee,” and
Vixen cocked her ear where she sat on the dog-cart. The second squadron
of the Lancers shot by, and there was the troop-horse, with his tail
like spun silk, his head pulled into his breast, one ear forward and one
back, setting the time for all his squadron, his legs going as smoothly
as waltz music. Then the big guns came by, and I saw Two Tails and two
other elephants harnessed in line to a forty-pounder siege gun, while
twenty yoke of oxen walked behind. The seventh pair had a new yoke, and
they looked rather stiff and tired. Last came the screw guns, and Billy
the mule carried himself as though he commanded all the troops, and his
harness was oiled and polished till it winked. I gave a cheer all by
myself for Billy the mule, but he never looked right or left.

The rain began to fall again, and for a while it was too misty to see
what the troops were doing. They had made a big half circle across the
plain, and were spreading out into a line. That line grew and grew and
grew till it was three-quarters of a mile long from wing to wing--one
solid wall of men, horses, and guns. Then it came on straight toward the
Viceroy and the Amir, and as it got nearer the ground began to shake,
like the deck of a steamer when the engines are going fast.

Unless you have been there you cannot imagine what a frightening effect
this steady come-down of troops has on the spectators, even when they
know it is only a review. I looked at the Amir. Up till then he had not
shown the shadow of a sign of astonishment or anything else. But now his
eyes began to get bigger and bigger, and he picked up the reins on his
horse’s neck and looked behind him. For a minute it seemed as though he
were going to draw his sword and slash his way out through the English
men and women in the carriages at the back. Then the advance stopped
dead, the ground stood still, the whole line saluted, and thirty bands
began to play all together. That was the end of the review, and the
regiments went off to their camps in the rain, and an infantry band
struck up with--

     The animals went in two by two,
          Hurrah!
     The animals went in two by two,
     The elephant and the battery mul’,
     and they all got into the Ark
          For to get out of the rain!

Then I heard an old grizzled, long-haired Central Asian chief, who had
come down with the Amir, asking questions of a native officer.

“Now,” said he, “in what manner was this wonderful thing done?”

And the officer answered, “An order was given, and they obeyed.”

“But are the beasts as wise as the men?” said the chief.

“They obey, as the men do. Mule, horse, elephant, or bullock, he
obeys his driver, and the driver his sergeant, and the sergeant his
lieutenant, and the lieutenant his captain, and the captain his major,
and the major his colonel, and the colonel his brigadier commanding
three regiments, and the brigadier the general, who obeys the Viceroy,
who is the servant of the Empress. Thus it is done.”

“Would it were so in Afghanistan!” said the chief, “for there we obey
only our own wills.”

“And for that reason,” said the native officer, twirling his mustache,
“your Amir whom you do not obey must come here and take orders from our
Viceroy.”




Parade Song of the Camp Animals

     ELEPHANTS OF THE GUN TEAMS

     We lent to Alexander the strength of Hercules,
     The wisdom of our foreheads, the cunning of our knees;
     We bowed our necks to service: they ne’er were loosed again,--
     Make way there--way for the ten-foot teams
           Of the Forty-Pounder train!

     GUN BULLOCKS

     Those heroes in their harnesses avoid a cannon-ball,
     And what they know of powder upsets them one and all;
     Then we come into action and tug the guns again--
     Make way there--way for the twenty yoke
           Of the Forty-Pounder train!

     CAVALRY HORSES

     By the brand on my shoulder, the finest of tunes
     Is played by the Lancers, Hussars, and Dragoons,
     And it’s sweeter than “Stables” or “Water” to me--
     The Cavalry Canter of “Bonnie Dundee”!

     Then feed us and break us and handle and groom,
     And give us good riders and plenty of room,
     And launch us in column of squadron and see
     The way of the war-horse to “Bonnie Dundee”!

     SCREW-GUN MULES

     As me and my companions were scrambling up a hill,
     The path was lost in rolling stones, but we went forward still;
     For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
     Oh, it’s our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to
        spare!

     Good luck to every sergeant, then, that lets us pick our road;
     Bad luck to all the driver-men that cannot pack a load:
     For we can wriggle and climb, my lads, and turn up everywhere,
     Oh, it’s our delight on a mountain height, with a leg or two to
        spare!

     COMMISSARIAT CAMELS

     We haven’t a camelty tune of our own
     To help us trollop along,
     But every neck is a hair trombone
     (Rtt-ta-ta-ta! is a hair trombone!)
     And this our marching-song:
     Can’t!  Don’t!  Shan’t!  Won’t!
     Pass it along the line!
     Somebody’s pack has slid from his back,
     Wish it were only mine!
     Somebody’s load has tipped off in the road--
     Cheer for a halt and a row!
     Urrr!  Yarrh!  Grr!  Arrh!
     Somebody’s catching it now!

     ALL THE BEASTS TOGETHER

     Children of the Camp are we,
     Serving each in his degree;
     Children of the yoke and goad,
     Pack and harness, pad and load.
     See our line across the plain,
     Like a heel-rope bent again,
     Reaching, writhing, rolling far,
     Sweeping all away to war!
     While the men that walk beside,
     Dusty, silent, heavy-eyed,
     Cannot tell why we or they
     March and suffer day by day.
        Children of the Camp are we,
        Serving each in his degree;
        Children of the yoke and goad,
        Pack and harness, pad and load!






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jungle Book, by Rudyard Kipling

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JUNGLE BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 236-0.txt or 236-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/236/

Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




His glory, by whose might all things are mov'd,
Pierces the universe, and in one part
Sheds more resplendence, elsewhere less.  In heav'n,
That largeliest of his light partakes, was I,
Witness of things, which to relate again
Surpasseth power of him who comes from thence;
For that, so near approaching its desire
Our intellect is to such depth absorb'd,
That memory cannot follow.  Nathless all,
That in my thoughts I of that sacred realm
Could store, shall now be matter of my song.

Benign Apollo! this last labour aid,
And make me such a vessel of thy worth,
As thy own laurel claims of me belov'd.
Thus far hath one of steep Parnassus' brows
Suffic'd me; henceforth there is need of both
For my remaining enterprise Do thou
Enter into my bosom, and there breathe
So, as when Marsyas by thy hand was dragg'd
Forth from his limbs unsheath'd.  O power divine!
If thou to me of shine impart so much,
That of that happy realm the shadow'd form
Trac'd in my thoughts I may set forth to view,
Thou shalt behold me of thy favour'd tree
Come to the foot, and crown myself with leaves;
For to that honour thou, and my high theme
Will fit me.  If but seldom, mighty Sire!
To grace his triumph gathers thence a wreath
Caesar or bard (more shame for human wills
Deprav'd) joy to the Delphic god must spring
From the Pierian foliage, when one breast
Is with such thirst inspir'd.  From a small spark
Great flame hath risen: after me perchance
Others with better voice may pray, and gain
From the Cirrhaean city answer kind.

Through diver passages, the world's bright lamp
Rises to mortals, but through that which joins
Four circles with the threefold cross, in best
Course, and in happiest constellation set
He comes, and to the worldly wax best gives
Its temper and impression.  Morning there,
Here eve was by almost such passage made;
And whiteness had o'erspread that hemisphere,
Blackness the other part; when to the left
I saw Beatrice turn'd, and on the sun
Gazing, as never eagle fix'd his ken.
As from the first a second beam is wont
To issue, and reflected upwards rise,
E'en as a pilgrim bent on his return,
So of her act, that through the eyesight pass'd
Into my fancy, mine was form'd; and straight,
Beyond our mortal wont, I fix'd mine eyes
Upon the sun.  Much is allowed us there,
That here exceeds our pow'r; thanks to the place
Made for the dwelling of the human kind

I suffer'd it not long, and yet so long
That I beheld it bick'ring sparks around,
As iron that comes boiling from the fire.
And suddenly upon the day appear'd
A day new-ris'n, as he, who hath the power,
Had with another sun bedeck'd the sky.

Her eyes fast fix'd on the eternal wheels,
Beatrice stood unmov'd; and I with ken
Fix'd upon her, from upward gaze remov'd
At her aspect, such inwardly became
As Glaucus, when he tasted of the herb,
That made him peer among the ocean gods;
Words may not tell of that transhuman change:
And therefore let the example serve, though weak,
For those whom grace hath better proof in store

If I were only what thou didst create,
Then newly, Love! by whom the heav'n is rul'd,
Thou know'st, who by thy light didst bear me up.
Whenas the wheel which thou dost ever guide,
Desired Spirit! with its harmony
Temper'd of thee and measur'd, charm'd mine ear,
Then seem'd to me so much of heav'n to blaze
With the sun's flame, that rain or flood ne'er made
A lake so broad.  The newness of the sound,
And that great light, inflam'd me with desire,
Keener than e'er was felt, to know their cause.

Whence she who saw me, clearly as myself,
To calm my troubled mind, before I ask'd,
Open'd her lips, and gracious thus began:
"With false imagination thou thyself
Mak'st dull, so that thou seest not the thing,
Which thou hadst seen, had that been shaken off.
Thou art not on the earth as thou believ'st;
For light'ning scap'd from its own proper place
Ne'er ran, as thou hast hither now return'd."

Although divested of my first-rais'd doubt,
By those brief words, accompanied with smiles,
Yet in new doubt was I entangled more,
And said: "Already satisfied, I rest
From admiration deep, but now admire
How I above those lighter bodies rise."

Whence, after utt'rance of a piteous sigh,
She tow'rds me bent her eyes, with such a look,
As on her frenzied child a mother casts;
Then thus began: "Among themselves all things
Have order; and from hence the form, which makes
The universe resemble God.  In this
The higher creatures see the printed steps
Of that eternal worth, which is the end
Whither the line is drawn.  All natures lean,
In this their order, diversely, some more,
Some less approaching to their primal source.
Thus they to different havens are mov'd on
Through the vast sea of being, and each one
With instinct giv'n, that bears it in its course;
This to the lunar sphere directs the fire,
This prompts the hearts of mortal animals,
This the brute earth together knits, and binds.
Nor only creatures, void of intellect,
Are aim'd at by this bow; but even those,
That have intelligence and love, are pierc'd.
That Providence, who so well orders all,
With her own light makes ever calm the heaven,
In which the substance, that hath greatest speed,
Is turn'd: and thither now, as to our seat
Predestin'd, we are carried by the force
Of that strong cord, that never looses dart,
But at fair aim and glad.  Yet is it true,
That as ofttimes but ill accords the form
To the design of art, through sluggishness
Of unreplying matter, so this course
Is sometimes quitted by the creature, who
Hath power, directed thus, to bend elsewhere;
As from a cloud the fire is seen to fall,
From its original impulse warp'd, to earth,
By vicious fondness.  Thou no more admire
Thy soaring, (if I rightly deem,) than lapse
Of torrent downwards from a mountain's height.
There would in thee for wonder be more cause,
If, free of hind'rance, thou hadst fix'd thyself
Below, like fire unmoving on the earth."

So said, she turn'd toward the heav'n her face.




II

All ye, who in small bark have following sail'd,
Eager to listen, on the advent'rous track
Of my proud keel, that singing cuts its way,
Backward return with speed, and your own shores
Revisit, nor put out to open sea,
Where losing me, perchance ye may remain
Bewilder'd in deep maze.  The way I pass
Ne'er yet was run: Minerva breathes the gale,
Apollo guides me, and another Nine
To my rapt sight the arctic beams reveal.
Ye other few, who have outstretch'd the neck.
Timely for food of angels, on which here
They live, yet never know satiety,
Through the deep brine ye fearless may put out
Your vessel, marking, well the furrow broad
Before you in the wave, that on both sides
Equal returns.  Those, glorious, who pass'd o'er
To Colchos, wonder'd not as ye will do,
When they saw Jason following the plough.

The increate perpetual thirst, that draws
Toward the realm of God's own form, bore us
Swift almost as the heaven ye behold.

Beatrice upward gaz'd, and I on her,
And in such space as on the notch a dart
Is plac'd, then loosen'd flies, I saw myself
Arriv'd, where wond'rous thing engag'd my sight.
Whence she, to whom no work of mine was hid,
Turning to me, with aspect glad as fair,
Bespake me: "Gratefully direct thy mind
To God, through whom to this first star we come."

Me seem'd as if a cloud had cover'd us,
Translucent, solid, firm, and polish'd bright,
Like adamant, which the sun's beam had smit
Within itself the ever-during pearl
Receiv'd us, as the wave a ray of light
Receives, and rests unbroken.  If I then
Was of corporeal frame, and it transcend
Our weaker thought, how one dimension thus
Another could endure, which needs must be
If body enter body, how much more
Must the desire inflame us to behold
That essence, which discovers by what means
God and our nature join'd!  There will be seen
That which we hold through faith, not shown by proof,
But in itself intelligibly plain,
E'en as the truth that man at first believes.

I answered: "Lady! I with thoughts devout,
Such as I best can frame, give thanks to Him,
Who hath remov'd me from the mortal world.
But tell, I pray thee, whence the gloomy spots
Upon this body, which below on earth
Give rise to talk of Cain in fabling quaint?"

She somewhat smil'd, then spake: "If mortals err
In their opinion, when the key of sense
Unlocks not, surely wonder's weapon keen
Ought not to pierce thee; since thou find'st, the wings
Of reason to pursue the senses' flight
Are short.  But what thy own thought is, declare."

Then I: "What various here above appears,
Is caus'd, I deem, by bodies dense or rare."

She then resum'd: "Thou certainly wilt see
In falsehood thy belief o'erwhelm'd, if well
Thou listen to the arguments, which I
Shall bring to face it.  The eighth sphere displays
Numberless lights, the which in kind and size
May be remark'd of different aspects;
If rare or dense of that were cause alone,
One single virtue then would be in all,
Alike distributed, or more, or less.
Different virtues needs must be the fruits
Of formal principles, and these, save one,
Will by thy reasoning be destroy'd.  Beside,
If rarity were of that dusk the cause,
Which thou inquirest, either in some part
That planet must throughout be void, nor fed
With its own matter; or, as bodies share
Their fat and leanness, in like manner this
Must in its volume change the leaves.  The first,
If it were true, had through the sun's eclipse
Been manifested, by transparency
Of light, as through aught rare beside effus'd.
But this is not.  Therefore remains to see
The other cause: and if the other fall,
Erroneous so must prove what seem'd to thee.
If not from side to side this rarity
Pass through, there needs must be a limit, whence
Its contrary no further lets it pass.
And hence the beam, that from without proceeds,
Must be pour'd back, as colour comes, through glass
Reflected, which behind it lead conceals.
Now wilt thou say, that there of murkier hue
Than in the other part the ray is shown,
By being thence refracted farther back.
From this perplexity will free thee soon
Experience, if thereof thou trial make,
The fountain whence your arts derive their streame.
Three mirrors shalt thou take, and two remove
From thee alike, and more remote the third.
Betwixt the former pair, shall meet thine eyes;
Then turn'd toward them, cause behind thy back
A light to stand, that on the three shall shine,
And thus reflected come to thee from all.
Though that beheld most distant do not stretch
A space so ample, yet in brightness thou
Will own it equaling the rest.  But now,
As under snow the ground, if the warm ray
Smites it, remains dismantled of the hue
And cold, that cover'd it before, so thee,
Dismantled in thy mind, I will inform
With light so lively, that the tremulous beam
Shall quiver where it falls.  Within the heaven,
Where peace divine inhabits, circles round
A body, in whose virtue dies the being
Of all that it contains.  The following heaven,
That hath so many lights, this being divides,
Through  different essences, from it distinct,
And yet contain'd within it.  The other orbs
Their separate distinctions variously
Dispose, for their own seed and produce apt.
Thus do these organs of the world proceed,
As thou beholdest now, from step to step,
Their influences from above deriving,
And thence transmitting downwards.  Mark me well,
How through this passage to the truth I ford,
The truth thou lov'st, that thou henceforth alone,
May'st know to keep the shallows, safe, untold.

"The virtue and motion of the sacred orbs,
As mallet by the workman's hand, must needs
By blessed movers be inspir'd.  This heaven,
Made beauteous by so many luminaries,
From the deep spirit, that moves its circling sphere,
Its image takes an impress as a seal:
And as the soul, that dwells within your dust,
Through members different, yet together form'd,
In different pow'rs resolves itself; e'en so
The intellectual efficacy unfolds
Its goodness multiplied throughout the stars;
On its own unity revolving still.
Different virtue compact different
Makes with the precious body it enlivens,
With which it knits, as life in you is knit.
From its original nature full of joy,
The virtue mingled through the body shines,
As joy through pupil of the living eye.
From hence proceeds, that which from light to light
Seems different, and not from dense or rare.
This is the formal cause, that generates
Proportion'd to its power, the dusk or clear."






That sun, which erst with love my bosom warm'd
Had of fair truth unveil'd the sweet aspect,
By proof of right, and of the false reproof;
And I, to own myself convinc'd and free
Of doubt, as much as needed, rais'd my head
Erect for speech.  But soon a sight appear'd,
Which, so intent to mark it, held me fix'd,
That of confession I no longer thought.

As through translucent and smooth glass, or wave
Clear and unmov'd, and flowing not so deep
As that its bed is dark, the shape returns
So faint of our impictur'd lineaments,
That on white forehead set a pearl as strong
Comes to the eye: such saw I many a face,
All stretch'd to speak, from whence I straight conceiv'd
Delusion opposite to that, which rais'd
Between the man and fountain, amorous flame.

Sudden, as I perceiv'd them, deeming these
Reflected semblances to see of whom
They were, I turn'd mine eyes, and nothing saw;
Then turn'd them back, directed on the light
Of my sweet guide, who smiling shot forth beams
From her celestial eyes.  "Wonder not thou,"
She cry'd, "at this my smiling, when I see
Thy childish judgment; since not yet on truth
It rests the foot, but, as it still is wont,
Makes thee fall back in unsound vacancy.
True substances are these, which thou behold'st,
Hither through failure of their vow exil'd.
But speak thou with them; listen, and believe,
That the true light, which fills them with desire,
Permits not from its beams their feet to stray."

Straight to the shadow which for converse seem'd
Most earnest, I addressed me, and began,
As one by over-eagerness perplex'd:
"O spirit, born for joy! who in the rays
Of life eternal, of that sweetness know'st
The flavour, which, not tasted, passes far
All apprehension, me it well would please,
If thou wouldst tell me of thy name, and this
Your station here." Whence she, with kindness prompt,
And eyes glist'ning with smiles: "Our charity,
To any wish by justice introduc'd,
Bars not the door, no more than she above,
Who would have all her court be like herself.
I was a virgin sister in the earth;
And if thy mind observe me well, this form,
With such addition grac'd of loveliness,
Will not conceal me long, but thou wilt know
Piccarda, in the tardiest sphere thus plac'd,
Here 'mid these other blessed also blest.
Our hearts, whose high affections burn alone
With pleasure, from the Holy Spirit conceiv'd,
Admitted to his order dwell in joy.
And this condition, which appears so low,
Is for this cause assign'd us, that our vows
Were in some part neglected and made void."

Whence I to her replied: "Something divine
Beams in your countenance, wond'rous fair,
From former knowledge quite transmuting you.
Therefore to recollect was I so slow.
But what thou sayst hath to my memory
Given now such aid, that to retrace your forms
Is easier.  Yet inform me, ye, who here
Are happy, long ye for a higher place
More to behold, and more in love to dwell?"

She with those other spirits gently smil'd,
Then answer'd with such gladness, that she seem'd
With love's first flame to glow: "Brother! our will
Is in composure settled by the power
Of charity, who makes us will alone
What we possess, and nought beyond desire;
If we should wish to be exalted more,
Then must our wishes jar with the high will
Of him, who sets us here, which in these orbs
Thou wilt confess not possible, if here
To be in charity must needs befall,
And if her nature well thou contemplate.
Rather it is inherent in this state
Of blessedness, to keep ourselves within
The divine will, by which our wills with his
Are one.  So that as we from step to step
Are plac'd throughout this kingdom, pleases all,
E'en as our King, who in us plants his will;
And in his will is our tranquillity;
It is the mighty ocean, whither tends
Whatever it creates and nature makes."

Then saw I clearly how each spot in heav'n
Is Paradise, though with like gracious dew
The supreme virtue show'r not over all.

But as it chances, if one sort of food
Hath satiated, and of another still
The appetite remains, that this is ask'd,
And thanks for that return'd; e'en so did I
In word and motion, bent from her to learn
What web it was, through which she had not drawn
The shuttle to its point.  She thus began:
"Exalted worth and perfectness of life
The Lady higher up enshrine in heaven,
By whose pure laws upon your nether earth
The robe and veil they wear, to that intent,
That e'en till death they may keep watch or sleep
With their great bridegroom, who accepts each vow,
Which to his gracious pleasure love conforms.
from the world, to follow her, when young
Escap'd; and, in her vesture mantling me,
Made promise of the way her sect enjoins.
Thereafter men, for ill than good more apt,
Forth snatch'd me from the pleasant cloister's pale.
God knows how after that my life was fram'd.
This other splendid shape, which thou beholdst
At my right side, burning with all the light
Of this our orb, what of myself I tell
May to herself apply.  From her, like me
A sister, with like violence were torn
The saintly folds, that shaded her fair brows.
E'en when she to the world again was brought
In spite of her own will and better wont,
Yet not for that the bosom's inward veil
Did she renounce.  This is the luminary
Of mighty Constance, who from that loud blast,
Which blew the second over Suabia's realm,
That power produc'd, which was the third and last."

She ceas'd from further talk, and then began
"Ave Maria" singing, and with that song
Vanish'd, as heavy substance through deep wave.

Mine eye, that far as it was capable,
Pursued her, when in dimness she was lost,
Turn'd to the mark where greater want impell'd,
And bent on Beatrice all its gaze.
But she as light'ning beam'd upon my looks:
So that the sight sustain'd it not at first.
Whence I to question her became less prompt.






Between two kinds of food, both equally
Remote and tempting, first a man might die
Of hunger, ere he one could freely choose.
E'en so would stand a lamb between the maw
Of two fierce wolves, in dread of both alike:
E'en so between two deer a dog would stand,
Wherefore, if I was silent, fault nor praise
I to myself impute, by equal doubts
Held in suspense, since of necessity
It happen'd.  Silent was I, yet desire
Was painted in my looks; and thus I spake
My wish more earnestly than language could.

As Daniel, when the haughty king he freed
From ire, that spurr'd him on to deeds unjust
And violent; so look'd Beatrice then.

"Well I discern," she thus her words address'd,
"How contrary desires each way constrain thee,
So that thy anxious thought is in itself
Bound up and stifled, nor breathes freely forth.
Thou arguest; if the good intent remain;
What reason that another's violence
Should stint the measure of my fair desert?

"Cause too thou findst for doubt, in that it seems,
That spirits to the stars, as Plato deem'd,
Return.  These are the questions which thy will
Urge equally; and therefore I the first
Of that will treat which hath the more of gall.
Of seraphim he who is most ensky'd,
Moses and Samuel, and either John,
Choose which thou wilt, nor even Mary's self,
Have not in any other heav'n their seats,
Than have those spirits which so late thou saw'st;
Nor more or fewer years exist; but all
Make the first circle beauteous, diversely
Partaking of sweet life, as more or less
Afflation of eternal bliss pervades them.
Here were they shown thee, not that fate assigns
This for their sphere, but for a sign to thee
Of that celestial furthest from the height.
Thus needs, that ye may apprehend, we speak:
Since from things sensible alone ye learn
That, which digested rightly after turns
To intellectual.  For no other cause
The scripture, condescending graciously
To your perception, hands and feet to God
Attributes, nor so means: and holy church
Doth represent with human countenance
Gabriel, and Michael, and him who made
Tobias whole.  Unlike what here thou seest,
The judgment of Timaeus, who affirms
Each soul restor'd to its particular star,
Believing it to have been taken thence,
When nature gave it to inform her mold:
Since to appearance his intention is
E'en what his words declare: or else to shun
Derision, haply thus he hath disguis'd
His true opinion.  If his meaning be,
That to the influencing of these orbs revert
The honour and the blame in human acts,
Perchance he doth not wholly miss the truth.
This principle, not understood aright,
Erewhile perverted well nigh all the world;
So that it fell to fabled names of Jove,
And Mercury, and Mars.  That other doubt,
Which moves thee, is less harmful; for it brings
No peril of removing thee from me.

"That, to the eye of man, our justice seems
Unjust, is argument for faith, and not
For heretic declension.  To the end
This truth may stand more clearly in your view,
I will content thee even to thy wish

"If violence be, when that which suffers, nought
Consents to that which forceth, not for this
These spirits stood exculpate.  For the will,
That will not, still survives unquench'd, and doth
As nature doth in fire, tho' violence
Wrest it a thousand times; for, if it yield
Or more or less, so far it follows force.
And thus did these, whom they had power to seek
The hallow'd place again.  In them, had will
Been perfect, such as once upon the bars
Held Laurence firm, or wrought in Scaevola
To his own hand remorseless, to the path,
Whence they were drawn, their steps had hasten'd back,
When liberty return'd: but in too few
Resolve so steadfast dwells.  And by these words
If duly weigh'd, that argument is void,
Which oft might have perplex'd thee still.  But now
Another question thwarts thee, which to solve
Might try thy patience without better aid.
I have, no doubt, instill'd into thy mind,
That blessed spirit may not lie; since near
The source of primal truth it dwells for aye:
And thou might'st after of Piccarda learn
That Constance held affection to the veil;
So that she seems to contradict me here.
Not seldom, brother, it hath chanc'd for men
To do what they had gladly left undone,
Yet to shun peril they have done amiss:
E'en as Alcmaeon, at his father's suit
Slew his own mother, so made pitiless
Not to lose pity.  On this point bethink thee,
That force and will are blended in such wise
As not to make the' offence excusable.
Absolute will agrees not to the wrong,
That inasmuch as there is fear of woe
From non-compliance, it agrees.  Of will
Thus absolute Piccarda spake, and I
Of th' other; so that both have truly said."

Such was the flow of that pure rill, that well'd
From forth the fountain of all truth; and such
The rest, that to my wond'ring thoughts I found.

"O thou of primal love the prime delight!
Goddess!"  I straight reply'd, "whose lively words
Still shed new heat and vigour through my soul!
Affection fails me to requite thy grace
With equal sum of gratitude: be his
To recompense, who sees and can reward thee.
Well I discern, that by that truth alone
Enlighten'd, beyond which no truth may roam,
Our mind can satisfy her thirst to know:
Therein she resteth, e'en as in his lair
The wild beast, soon as she hath reach'd that bound,
And she hath power to reach it; else desire
Were given to no end.  And thence doth doubt
Spring, like a shoot, around the stock of truth;
And it is nature which from height to height
On to the summit prompts us.  This invites,
This doth assure me, lady, rev'rently
To ask thee of other truth, that yet
Is dark to me.  I fain would know, if man
By other works well done may so supply
The failure of his vows, that in your scale
They lack not weight."  I spake; and on me straight
Beatrice look'd with eyes that shot forth sparks
Of love celestial in such copious stream,
That, virtue sinking in me overpower'd,
I turn'd, and downward bent confus'd my sight.






"If beyond earthly wont, the flame of love
Illume me, so that I o'ercome thy power
Of vision, marvel not: but learn the cause
In that perfection of the sight, which soon
As apprehending, hasteneth on to reach
The good it apprehends.  I well discern,
How in thine intellect already shines
The light eternal, which to view alone
Ne'er fails to kindle love; and if aught else
Your love seduces, 't is but that it shows
Some ill-mark'd vestige of that primal beam.

"This would'st thou know, if failure of the vow
By other service may be so supplied,
As from self-question to assure the soul."

Thus she her words, not heedless of my wish,
Began; and thus, as one who breaks not off
Discourse, continued in her saintly strain.
"Supreme of gifts, which God creating gave
Of his free bounty, sign most evident
Of goodness, and in his account most priz'd,
Was liberty of will, the boon wherewith
All intellectual creatures, and them sole
He hath endow'd.  Hence now thou mayst infer
Of what high worth the vow, which so is fram'd
That when man offers, God well-pleas'd accepts;
For in the compact between God and him,
This treasure, such as I describe it to thee,
He makes the victim, and of his own act.
What compensation therefore may he find?
If that, whereof thou hast oblation made,
By using well thou think'st to consecrate,
Thou would'st of theft do charitable deed.
Thus I resolve thee of the greater point.

"But forasmuch as holy church, herein
Dispensing, seems to contradict the truth
I have discover'd to thee, yet behooves
Thou rest a little longer at the board,
Ere the crude aliment, which thou hast taken,
Digested fitly to nutrition turn.
Open thy mind to what I now unfold,
And give it inward keeping.  Knowledge comes
Of learning well retain'd, unfruitful else.

"This sacrifice in essence of two things
Consisteth; one is that, whereof 't is made,
The covenant the other.  For the last,
It ne'er is cancell'd if not kept: and hence
I spake erewhile so strictly of its force.
For this it was enjoin'd the Israelites,
Though leave were giv'n them, as thou know'st, to change
The offering, still to offer.  Th' other part,
The matter and the substance of the vow,
May well be such, to that without offence
It may for other substance be exchang'd.
But at his own discretion none may shift
The burden on his shoulders, unreleas'd
By either key, the yellow and the white.
Nor deem of any change, as less than vain,
If the last bond be not within the new
Included, as the quatre in the six.
No satisfaction therefore can be paid
For what so precious in the balance weighs,
That all in counterpoise must kick the beam.
Take then no vow at random: ta'en, with faith
Preserve it; yet not bent, as Jephthah once,
Blindly to execute a rash resolve,
Whom better it had suited to exclaim,
'I have done ill,' than to redeem his pledge
By doing worse or, not unlike to him
In folly, that great leader of the Greeks:
Whence, on the alter, Iphigenia mourn'd
Her virgin beauty, and hath since made mourn
Both wise and simple, even all, who hear
Of so fell sacrifice.  Be ye more staid,
O Christians, not, like feather, by each wind
Removable: nor think to cleanse ourselves
In every water.  Either testament,
The old and new, is yours: and for your guide
The shepherd of the church let this suffice
To save you.  When by evil lust entic'd,
Remember ye be men, not senseless beasts;
Nor let the Jew, who dwelleth in your streets,
Hold you in mock'ry.  Be not, as the lamb,
That, fickle wanton, leaves its mother's milk,
To dally with itself in idle play."

Such were the words that Beatrice spake:
These ended, to that region, where the world
Is liveliest, full of fond desire she turn'd.

Though mainly prompt new question to propose,
Her silence and chang'd look did keep me dumb.
And as the arrow, ere the cord is still,
Leapeth unto its mark; so on we sped
Into the second realm.  There I beheld
The dame, so joyous enter, that the orb
Grew brighter at her smiles; and, if the star
Were mov'd to gladness, what then was my cheer,
Whom nature hath made apt for every change!

As in a quiet and clear lake the fish,
If aught approach them from without, do draw
Towards it, deeming it their food; so drew
Full more than thousand splendours towards us,
And in each one was heard: "Lo! one arriv'd
To multiply our loves!" and as each came
The shadow, streaming forth effulgence new,
Witness'd augmented joy.  Here, reader! think,
If thou didst miss the sequel of my tale,
To know the rest how sorely thou wouldst crave;
And thou shalt see what vehement desire
Possess'd me, as soon as these had met my view,
To know their state.  "O born in happy hour!
Thou to whom grace vouchsafes, or ere thy close
Of fleshly warfare, to behold the thrones
Of that eternal triumph, know to us
The light communicated, which through heaven
Expatiates without bound.  Therefore, if aught
Thou of our beams wouldst borrow for thine aid,
Spare not; and of our radiance take thy fill."

Thus of those piteous spirits one bespake me;
And Beatrice next: "Say on; and trust
As unto gods!"--"How in the light supreme
Thou harbour'st, and from thence the virtue bring'st,
That, sparkling in thine eyes, denotes thy joy,
I mark; but, who thou art, am still to seek;
Or wherefore, worthy spirit! for thy lot
This sphere assign'd, that oft from mortal ken
Is veil'd by others' beams."  I said, and turn'd
Toward the lustre, that with greeting, kind
Erewhile had hail'd me.  Forthwith brighter far
Than erst, it wax'd: and, as himself the sun
Hides through excess of light, when his warm gaze
Hath on the mantle of thick vapours prey'd;
Within its proper ray the saintly shape
Was, through increase of gladness, thus conceal'd;
And, shrouded so in splendour answer'd me,
E'en as the tenour of my song declares.






"After that Constantine the eagle turn'd
Against the motions of the heav'n, that roll'd
Consenting with its course, when he of yore,
Lavinia's spouse, was leader of the flight,
A hundred years twice told and more, his seat
At Europe's extreme point, the bird of Jove
Held, near the mountains, whence he issued first.
There, under shadow of his sacred plumes
Swaying the world, till through successive hands
To mine he came devolv'd.  Caesar I was,
And am Justinian; destin'd by the will
Of that prime love, whose influence I feel,
From vain excess to clear th' encumber'd laws.
Or ere that work engag'd me, I did hold
Christ's nature merely human, with such faith
Contented.  But the blessed Agapete,
Who was chief shepherd, he with warning voice
To the true faith recall'd me.  I believ'd
His words: and what he taught, now plainly see,
As thou in every contradiction seest
The true and false oppos'd.  Soon as my feet
Were to the church reclaim'd, to my great task,
By inspiration of God's grace impell'd,
I gave me wholly, and consign'd mine arms
To Belisarius, with whom heaven's right hand
Was link'd in such conjointment, 't was a sign
That I should rest.  To thy first question thus
I shape mine answer, which were ended here,
But that its tendency doth prompt perforce
To some addition; that thou well, mayst mark
What reason on each side they have to plead,
By whom that holiest banner is withstood,
Both who pretend its power and who oppose.

"Beginning from that hour, when Pallas died
To give it rule, behold the valorous deeds
Have made it worthy reverence.  Not unknown
To thee, how for three hundred years and more
It dwelt in Alba, up to those fell lists
Where for its sake were met the rival three;
Nor aught unknown to thee, which it achiev'd
Down to the Sabines' wrong to Lucrece' woe,
With its sev'n kings conqu'ring the nation round;
Nor all it wrought, by Roman worthies home
'Gainst Brennus and th' Epirot prince, and hosts
Of single chiefs, or states in league combin'd
Of social warfare; hence Torquatus stern,
And Quintius nam'd of his neglected locks,
The Decii, and the Fabii hence acquir'd
Their fame, which I with duteous zeal embalm.
By it the pride of Arab hordes was quell'd,
When they led on by Hannibal o'erpass'd
The Alpine rocks, whence glide thy currents, Po!
Beneath its guidance, in their prime of days
Scipio and Pompey triumph'd; and that hill,
Under whose summit thou didst see the light,
Rued its stern bearing.  After, near the hour,
When heav'n was minded that o'er all the world
His own deep calm should brood, to Caesar's hand
Did Rome consign it; and what then it wrought
From Var unto the Rhine, saw Isere's flood,
Saw Loire and Seine, and every vale, that fills
The torrent Rhone.  What after that it wrought,
When from Ravenna it came forth, and leap'd
The Rubicon, was of so bold a flight,
That tongue nor pen may follow it.  Tow'rds Spain
It wheel'd its bands, then tow'rd Dyrrachium smote,
And on Pharsalia with so fierce a plunge,
E'en the warm Nile was conscious to the pang;
Its native shores Antandros, and the streams
Of Simois revisited, and there
Where Hector lies; then ill for Ptolemy
His pennons shook again; lightning thence fell
On Juba; and the next upon your west,
At sound of the Pompeian trump, return'd.

"What following and in its next bearer's gripe
It wrought, is now by Cassius and Brutus
Bark'd off in hell, and by Perugia's sons
And Modena's was mourn'd.  Hence weepeth still
Sad Cleopatra, who, pursued by it,
Took from the adder black and sudden death.
With him it ran e'en to the Red Sea coast;
With him compos'd the world to such a peace,
That of his temple Janus barr'd the door.

"But all the mighty standard yet had wrought,
And was appointed to perform thereafter,
Throughout the mortal kingdom which it sway'd,
Falls in appearance dwindled and obscur'd,
If one with steady eye and perfect thought
On the third Caesar look; for to his hands,
The living Justice, in whose breath I move,
Committed glory, e'en into his hands,
To execute the vengeance of its wrath.

"Hear now and wonder at what next I tell.
After with Titus it was sent to wreak
Vengeance for vengeance of the ancient sin,
And, when the Lombard tooth, with fangs impure,
Did gore the bosom of the holy church,
Under its wings victorious, Charlemagne
Sped to her rescue.  Judge then for thyself
Of those, whom I erewhile accus'd to thee,
What they are, and how grievous their offending,
Who are the cause of all your ills.  The one
Against the universal ensign rears
The yellow lilies, and with partial aim
That to himself the other arrogates:
So that 't is hard to see which more offends.
Be yours, ye Ghibellines, to veil your arts
Beneath another standard: ill is this
Follow'd of him, who severs it and justice:
And let not with his Guelphs the new-crown'd Charles
Assail it, but those talons hold in dread,
Which from a lion of more lofty port
Have rent the easing.  Many a time ere now
The sons have for the sire's transgression wail'd;
Nor let him trust the fond belief, that heav'n
Will truck its armour for his lilied shield.

"This little star is furnish'd with good spirits,
Whose mortal lives were busied to that end,
That honour and renown might wait on them:
And, when desires thus err in their intention,
True love must needs ascend with slacker beam.
But it is part of our delight, to measure
Our wages with the merit; and admire
The close proportion.  Hence doth heav'nly justice
Temper so evenly affection in us,
It ne'er can warp to any wrongfulness.
Of diverse voices is sweet music made:
So in our life the different degrees
Render sweet harmony among these wheels.

"Within the pearl, that now encloseth us,
Shines Romeo's light, whose goodly deed and fair
Met ill acceptance.  But the Provencals,
That were his foes, have little cause for mirth.
Ill shapes that man his course, who makes his wrong
Of other's worth.  Four daughters were there born
To Raymond Berenger, and every one
Became a queen; and this for him did Romeo,
Though of mean state and from a foreign land.
Yet envious tongues incited him to ask
A reckoning of that just one, who return'd
Twelve fold to him for ten.  Aged and poor
He parted thence: and if the world did know
The heart he had, begging his life by morsels,
'T would deem the praise, it yields him, scantly dealt."






"Hosanna Sanctus Deus Sabaoth
Superillustrans claritate tua
Felices ignes horum malahoth!"
Thus chanting saw I turn that substance bright
With fourfold lustre to its orb again,
Revolving; and the rest unto their dance
With it mov'd also; and like swiftest sparks,
In sudden distance from my sight were veil'd.

Me doubt possess'd, and "Speak," it whisper'd me,
"Speak, speak unto thy lady, that she quench
Thy thirst with drops of sweetness."  Yet blank awe,
Which lords it o'er me, even at the sound
Of Beatrice's name, did bow me down
As one in slumber held.  Not long that mood
Beatrice suffer'd: she, with such a smile,
As might have made one blest amid the flames,
Beaming upon me, thus her words began:
"Thou in thy thought art pond'ring (as I deem),
And what I deem is truth how just revenge
Could be with justice punish'd: from which doubt
I soon will free thee; so thou mark my words;
For they of weighty matter shall possess thee.

"That man, who was unborn, himself condemn'd,
And, in himself, all, who since him have liv'd,
His offspring: whence, below, the human kind
Lay sick in grievous error many an age;
Until it pleas'd the Word of God to come
Amongst them down, to his own person joining
The nature, from its Maker far estrang'd,
By the mere act of his eternal love.
Contemplate here the wonder I unfold.
The nature with its Maker thus conjoin'd,
Created first was blameless, pure and good;
But through itself alone was driven forth
From Paradise, because it had eschew'd
The way of truth and life, to evil turn'd.
Ne'er then was penalty so just as that
Inflicted by the cross, if thou regard
The nature in assumption doom'd: ne'er wrong
So great, in reference to him, who took
Such nature on him, and endur'd the doom.
God therefore and the Jews one sentence pleased:
So different effects flow'd from one act,
And heav'n was open'd, though the earth did quake.
Count it not hard henceforth, when thou dost hear
That a just vengeance was by righteous court
Justly reveng'd.  But yet I see thy mind
By thought on thought arising sore perplex'd,
And with how vehement desire it asks
Solution of the maze.  What I have heard,
Is plain, thou sayst: but wherefore God this way
For our redemption chose, eludes my search.

"Brother! no eye of man not perfected,
Nor fully ripen'd in the flame of love,
May fathom this decree.  It is a mark,
In sooth, much aim'd at, and but little kenn'd:
And I will therefore show thee why such way
Was worthiest.  The celestial love, that spume
All envying in its bounty, in itself
With such effulgence blazeth, as sends forth
All beauteous things eternal.  What distils
Immediate thence, no end of being knows,
Bearing its seal immutably impress'd.
Whatever thence immediate falls, is free,
Free wholly, uncontrollable by power
Of each thing new: by such conformity
More grateful to its author, whose bright beams,
Though all partake their shining, yet in those
Are liveliest, which resemble him the most.
These tokens of pre-eminence on man
Largely bestow'd, if any of them fail,
He needs must forfeit his nobility,
No longer stainless.  Sin alone is that,
Which doth disfranchise him, and make unlike
To the chief good; for that its light in him
Is darken'd.  And to dignity thus lost
Is no return; unless, where guilt makes void,
He for ill pleasure pay with equal pain.
Your nature, which entirely in its seed
Trangress'd, from these distinctions fell, no less
Than from its state in Paradise; nor means
Found of recovery (search all methods out
As strickly as thou may) save one of these,
The only fords were left through which to wade,
Either that God had of his courtesy
Releas'd him merely, or else man himself
For his own folly by himself aton'd.

"Fix now thine eye, intently as thou canst,
On th' everlasting counsel, and explore,
Instructed by my words, the dread abyss.

"Man in himself had ever lack'd the means
Of satisfaction, for he could not stoop
Obeying, in humility so low,
As high he, disobeying, thought to soar:
And for this reason he had vainly tried
Out of his own sufficiency to pay
The rigid satisfaction.  Then behooved
That God should by his own ways lead him back
Unto the life, from whence he fell, restor'd:
By both his ways, I mean, or one alone.
But since the deed is ever priz'd the more,
The more the doer's good intent appears,
Goodness celestial, whose broad signature
Is on the universe, of all its ways
To raise ye up, was fain to leave out none,
Nor aught so vast or so magnificent,
Either for him who gave or who receiv'd
Between the last night and the primal day,
Was or can be.  For God more bounty show'd.
Giving himself to make man capable
Of his return to life, than had the terms
Been mere and unconditional release.
And for his justice, every method else
Were all too scant, had not the Son of God
Humbled himself to put on mortal flesh.

"Now, to fulfil each wish of thine, remains
I somewhat further to thy view unfold.
That thou mayst see as clearly as myself.

"I see, thou sayst, the air, the fire I see,
The earth and water, and all things of them
Compounded, to corruption turn, and soon
Dissolve.  Yet these were also things create,
Because, if what were told me, had been true
They from corruption had been therefore free.

"The angels, O my brother! and this clime
Wherein thou art, impassible and pure,
I call created, as indeed they are
In their whole being.  But the elements,
Which thou hast nam'd, and what of them is made,
Are by created virtue' inform'd: create
Their substance, and create the' informing virtue
In these bright stars, that round them circling move
The soul of every brute and of each plant,
The ray and motion of the sacred lights,
With complex potency attract and turn.
But this our life the' eternal good inspires
Immediate, and enamours of itself;
So that our wishes rest for ever here.

"And hence thou mayst by inference conclude
Our resurrection certain, if thy mind
Consider how the human flesh was fram'd,
When both our parents at the first were made."






The world was in its day of peril dark
Wont to believe the dotage of fond love
From the fair Cyprian deity, who rolls
In her third epicycle, shed on men
By stream of potent radiance: therefore they
Of elder time, in their old error blind,
Not her alone with sacrifice ador'd
And invocation, but like honours paid
To Cupid and Dione, deem'd of them
Her mother, and her son, him whom they feign'd
To sit in Dido's bosom: and from her,
Whom I have sung preluding, borrow'd they
The appellation of that star, which views,
Now obvious and now averse, the sun.

I was not ware that I was wafted up
Into  its orb; but the new loveliness
That grac'd my lady, gave me ample proof
That we had entered there.  And as in flame
A sparkle is distinct, or voice in voice
Discern'd, when one its even tenour keeps,
The other comes and goes; so in that light
I other luminaries saw, that cours'd
In circling motion, rapid more or less,
As their eternal phases each impels.

Never was blast from vapour charged with cold,
Whether invisible to eye or no,
Descended with such speed, it had not seem'd
To linger in dull tardiness, compar'd
To those celestial lights, that tow'rds us came,
Leaving the circuit of their joyous ring,
Conducted by the lofty seraphim.
And after them, who in the van appear'd,
Such an hosanna sounded, as hath left
Desire, ne'er since extinct in me, to hear
Renew'd the strain.  Then parting from the rest
One near us drew, and sole began: "We all
Are ready at thy pleasure, well dispos'd
To do thee gentle service.  We are they,
To whom thou in the world erewhile didst Sing
'O ye! whose intellectual ministry
Moves the third heaven!' and in one orb we roll,
One motion, one impulse, with those who rule
Princedoms in heaven; yet are of love so full,
That to please thee 't will be as sweet to rest."

After mine eyes had with meek reverence
Sought the celestial guide, and were by her
Assur'd, they turn'd again unto the light
Who had so largely promis'd, and with voice
That bare the lively pressure of my zeal,
"Tell who ye are," I cried.  Forthwith it grew
In size and splendour, through augmented joy;
And thus it answer'd: "A short date below
The world possess'd me.  Had the time been more,
Much evil, that will come, had never chanc'd.
My gladness hides thee from me, which doth shine
Around, and shroud me, as an animal
In its own silk unswath'd.  Thou lov'dst me well,
And had'st good cause; for had my sojourning
Been longer on the earth, the love I bare thee
Had put forth more than blossoms.  The left bank,
That Rhone, when he hath mix'd with Sorga, laves.

"In me its lord expected, and that horn
Of fair Ausonia, with its boroughs old,
Bari, and Croton, and Gaeta pil'd,
From where the Trento disembogues his waves,
With Verde mingled, to the salt sea-flood.
Already on my temples beam'd the crown,
Which gave me sov'reignty over the land
By Danube wash'd, whenas he strays beyond
The limits of his German shores.  The realm,
Where, on the gulf by stormy Eurus lash'd,
Betwixt Pelorus and Pachynian heights,
The beautiful Trinacria lies in gloom
(Not through Typhaeus, but the vap'ry cloud
Bituminous upsteam'd), THAT too did look
To have its scepter wielded by a race
Of monarchs, sprung through me from Charles and Rodolph;
had not ill lording which doth spirit up
The people ever, in Palermo rais'd
The shout of 'death,' re-echo'd loud and long.
Had but my brother's foresight kenn'd as much,
He had been warier that the greedy want
Of Catalonia might not work his bale.
And truly need there is, that he forecast,
Or other for him, lest more freight be laid
On his already over-laden bark.
Nature in him, from bounty fall'n to thrift,
Would ask the  guard of braver arms, than such
As only care to have their coffers fill'd."

"My liege, it doth enhance the joy thy words
Infuse into me, mighty as it is,
To think my gladness manifest to thee,
As to myself, who own it, when thou lookst
Into the source and limit of all good,
There, where thou markest that which thou dost speak,
Thence priz'd of me the more.  Glad thou hast made me.
Now make intelligent, clearing the doubt
Thy speech hath raised in me; for much I muse,
How bitter can spring up, when sweet is sown."

I thus inquiring; he forthwith replied:
"If I have power to show one truth, soon that
Shall face thee, which thy questioning declares
Behind thee now conceal'd.  The Good, that guides
And blessed makes this realm, which thou dost mount,
Ordains its providence to be the virtue
In these great bodies: nor th' all perfect Mind
Upholds their nature merely, but in them
Their energy to save: for nought, that lies
Within the range of that unerring bow,
But is as level with the destin'd aim,
As ever mark to arrow's point oppos'd.
Were it not thus, these heavens, thou dost visit,
Would their effect so work, it would not be
Art, but destruction; and this may not chance,
If th' intellectual powers, that move these stars,
Fail not, or who, first faulty made them fail.
Wilt thou this truth more clearly evidenc'd?"

To whom I thus: "It is enough: no fear,
I see, lest nature in her part should tire."

He straight rejoin'd: "Say, were it worse for man,
If he liv'd not in fellowship on earth?"

"Yea," answer'd I; "nor here a reason needs."

"And may that be, if different estates
Grow not of different duties in your life?
Consult your teacher, and he tells you 'no."'

Thus did he come, deducing to this point,
And then concluded: "For this cause behooves,
The roots, from whence your operations come,
Must differ.  Therefore one is Solon born;
Another, Xerxes; and Melchisidec
A third; and he a fourth, whose airy voyage
Cost him his son.  In her circuitous course,
Nature, that is the seal to mortal wax,
Doth well her art, but no distinctions owns
'Twixt one or other household.  Hence befalls
That Esau is so wide of Jacob: hence
Quirinus of so base a father springs,
He dates from Mars his lineage.  Were it not
That providence celestial overrul'd,
Nature, in generation, must the path
Trac'd by the generator, still pursue
Unswervingly.  Thus place I in thy sight
That, which was late behind thee.  But, in sign
Of more affection for thee, 't is my will
Thou wear this corollary.  Nature ever
Finding discordant fortune, like all seed
Out of its proper climate, thrives but ill.
And were the world below content to mark
And work on the foundation nature lays,
It would not lack supply of excellence.
But ye perversely to religion strain
Him, who was born to gird on him the sword,
And of the fluent phrasemen make your king;
Therefore your steps have wander'd from the paths."






After solution of my doubt, thy Charles,
O fair Clemenza, of the treachery spake
That must befall his seed: but, "Tell it not,"
Said he, "and let the destin'd years come round."
Nor may I tell thee more, save that the meed
Of sorrow well-deserv'd shall quit your wrongs.

And now the visage of that saintly light
Was to the sun, that fills it, turn'd again,
As to the good, whose plenitude of bliss
Sufficeth all.  O ye misguided souls!
Infatuate, who from such a good estrange
Your hearts, and bend your gaze on vanity,
Alas for you!--And lo! toward me, next,
Another of those splendent forms approach'd,
That, by its outward bright'ning, testified
The will it had to pleasure me.  The eyes
Of Beatrice, resting, as before,
Firmly upon me, manifested forth
Approval of my wish.  "And O," I cried,
"Blest spirit! quickly be my will perform'd;
And prove thou to me, that my inmost thoughts
I can reflect on thee."  Thereat the light,
That yet was new to me, from the recess,
Where it before was singing, thus began,
As one who joys in kindness: "In that part
Of the deprav'd Italian land, which lies
Between Rialto, and the fountain-springs
Of Brenta and of Piava, there doth rise,
But to no lofty eminence, a hill,
From whence erewhile a firebrand did descend,
That sorely sheet the region.  From one root
I and it sprang; my name on earth Cunizza:
And here I glitter, for that by its light
This star o'ercame me.  Yet I naught repine,
Nor grudge myself the cause of this my lot,
Which haply vulgar hearts can scarce conceive.

"This jewel, that is next me in our heaven,
Lustrous and costly, great renown hath left,
And not to perish, ere these hundred years
Five times absolve their round.  Consider thou,
If to excel be worthy man's endeavour,
When such life may attend the first.  Yet they
Care not for this, the crowd that now are girt
By Adice and Tagliamento, still
Impenitent, tho' scourg'd.  The hour is near,
When for their stubbornness at Padua's marsh
The water shall be chang'd, that laves Vicena
And where Cagnano meets with Sile, one
Lords it, and bears his head aloft, for whom
The web is now a-warping.  Feltro too
Shall sorrow for its godless shepherd's fault,
Of so deep stain, that never, for the like,
Was Malta's bar unclos'd.  Too large should be
The skillet, that would hold Ferrara's blood,
And wearied he, who ounce by ounce would weight it,
The which this priest, in show of party-zeal,
Courteous will give; nor will the gift ill suit
The country's custom.  We descry above,
Mirrors, ye call them thrones, from which to us
Reflected shine the judgments of our God:
Whence these our sayings we avouch for good."

She ended, and appear'd on other thoughts
Intent, re-ent'ring on the wheel she late
Had left.  That other joyance meanwhile wax'd
A thing to marvel at, in splendour glowing,
Like choicest ruby stricken by the sun,
For, in that upper clime, effulgence comes
Of gladness, as here laughter: and below,
As the mind saddens, murkier grows the shade.

"God seeth all: and in him is thy sight,"
Said I, "blest Spirit!  Therefore will of his
Cannot to thee be dark.  Why then delays
Thy voice to satisfy my wish untold,
That voice which joins the inexpressive song,
Pastime of heav'n, the which those ardours sing,
That cowl them with six shadowing wings outspread?
I would not wait thy asking, wert thou known
To me, as thoroughly I to thee am known."

He forthwith answ'ring, thus his words began:
"The valley' of waters, widest next to that
Which doth the earth engarland, shapes its course,
Between discordant shores, against the sun
Inward so far, it makes meridian there,
Where was before th' horizon.  Of that vale
Dwelt I upon the shore, 'twixt Ebro's stream
And Macra's, that divides with passage brief
Genoan bounds from Tuscan.  East and west
Are nearly one to Begga and my land,
Whose haven erst was with its own blood warm.
Who knew my name were wont to call me Folco:
And I did bear impression of this heav'n,
That now bears mine: for not with fiercer flame
Glow'd Belus' daughter, injuring alike
Sichaeus and Creusa, than did I,
Long as it suited the unripen'd down
That fledg'd my cheek: nor she of Rhodope,
That was beguiled of Demophoon;
Nor Jove's son, when the charms of Iole
Were shrin'd within his heart.  And yet there hides
No sorrowful repentance here, but mirth,
Not for the fault (that doth not come to mind),
But for the virtue, whose o'erruling sway
And providence have wrought thus quaintly.  Here
The skill is look'd into, that fashioneth
With such effectual working, and the good
Discern'd, accruing to this upper world
From that below.  But fully to content
Thy wishes, all that in this sphere have birth,
Demands my further parle.  Inquire thou wouldst,
Who of this light is denizen, that here
Beside me sparkles, as the sun-beam doth
On the clear wave.  Know then, the soul of Rahab
Is in that gladsome harbour, to our tribe
United, and the foremost rank assign'd.
He to that heav'n, at which the shadow ends
Of your sublunar world, was taken up,
First, in Christ's triumph, of all souls redeem'd:
For well behoov'd, that, in some part of heav'n,
She should remain a trophy, to declare
The mighty contest won with either palm;
For that she favour'd first the high exploit
Of Joshua on the holy land, whereof
The Pope recks little now.  Thy city, plant
Of him, that on his Maker turn'd the back,
And of whose envying so much woe hath sprung,
Engenders and expands the cursed flower,
That hath made wander both the sheep and lambs,
Turning the shepherd to a wolf.  For this,
The gospel and great teachers laid aside,
The decretals, as their stuft margins show,
Are the sole study.  Pope and Cardinals,
Intent on these, ne'er journey but in thought
To Nazareth, where Gabriel op'd his wings.
Yet it may chance, erelong, the Vatican,
And other most selected parts of Rome,
That were the grave of Peter's soldiery,
Shall be deliver'd from the adult'rous bond."






Looking into his first-born with the love,
Which breathes from both eternal, the first Might
Ineffable, whence eye or mind
Can roam, hath in such order all dispos'd,
As none may see and fail to enjoy.  Raise, then,
O reader! to the lofty wheels, with me,
Thy ken directed to the point, whereat
One motion strikes on th' other.  There begin
Thy wonder of the mighty Architect,
Who loves his work so inwardly, his eye
Doth ever watch it.  See, how thence oblique
Brancheth the circle, where the planets roll
To pour their wished influence on the world;
Whose path not bending thus, in heav'n above
Much virtue would be lost, and here on earth,
All power well nigh extinct: or, from direct
Were its departure distant more or less,
I' th' universal order, great defect
Must, both in heav'n and here beneath, ensue.

Now rest thee, reader! on thy bench, and muse
Anticipative of the feast to come;
So shall delight make thee not feel thy toil.
Lo! I have set before thee, for thyself
Feed now: the matter I indite, henceforth
Demands entire my thought.  Join'd with the part,
Which late we told of, the great minister
Of nature, that upon the world imprints
The virtue of the heaven, and doles out
Time for us with his beam, went circling on
Along the spires, where each hour sooner comes;
And I was with him, weetless of ascent,
As one, who till arriv'd, weets not his coming.

For Beatrice, she who passeth on
So suddenly from good to better, time
Counts not the act, oh then how great must needs
Have been her brightness!  What she was i' th' sun
(Where I had enter'd), not through change of hue,
But light transparent--did I summon up
Genius, art, practice--I might not so speak,
It should be e'er imagin'd: yet believ'd
It may be, and the sight be justly crav'd.
And if our fantasy fail of such height,
What marvel, since no eye above the sun
Hath ever travel'd?  Such are they dwell here,
Fourth family of the Omnipotent Sire,
Who of his spirit and of his offspring shows;
And holds them still enraptur'd with the view.
And thus to me Beatrice: "Thank, oh thank,
The Sun of angels, him, who by his grace
To this perceptible hath lifted thee."

Never was heart in such devotion bound,
And with complacency so absolute
Dispos'd to render up itself to God,
As mine was at those words: and so entire
The love for Him, that held me, it eclips'd
Beatrice in oblivion.  Naught displeas'd
Was she, but smil'd thereat so joyously,
That of her laughing eyes the radiance brake
And scatter'd my collected mind abroad.

Then saw I a bright band, in liveliness
Surpassing, who themselves did make the crown,
And us their centre: yet more sweet in voice,
Than in their visage beaming.  Cinctur'd thus,
Sometime Latona's daughter we behold,
When the impregnate air retains the thread,
That weaves her zone.  In the celestial court,
Whence I return, are many jewels found,
So dear and beautiful, they cannot brook
Transporting from that realm: and of these lights
Such was the song.  Who doth not prune his wing
To soar up thither, let him look from thence
For tidings from the dumb.  When, singing thus,
Those burning suns that circled round us thrice,
As nearest stars around the fixed pole,
Then seem'd they like to ladies, from the dance
Not ceasing, but suspense, in silent pause,
List'ning, till they have caught the strain anew:
Suspended so they stood: and, from within,
Thus heard I one, who spake: "Since with its beam
The grace, whence true love lighteth first his flame,
That after doth increase by loving, shines
So multiplied in thee, it leads thee up
Along this ladder, down whose hallow'd steps
None e'er descend, and mount them not again,
Who from his phial should refuse thee wine
To slake thy thirst, no less constrained were,
Than water flowing not unto the sea.
Thou fain wouldst hear, what plants are these, that bloom
In the bright garland, which, admiring, girds
This fair dame round, who strengthens thee for heav'n.
I then was of the lambs, that Dominic
Leads, for his saintly flock, along the way,
Where well they thrive, not sworn with vanity.
He, nearest on my right hand, brother was,
And master to me: Albert of Cologne
Is this: and of Aquinum, Thomas I.
If thou of all the rest wouldst be assur'd,
Let thine eye, waiting on the words I speak,
In circuit journey round the blessed wreath.
That next resplendence issues from the smile
Of Gratian, who to either forum lent
Such help, as favour wins in Paradise.
The other, nearest, who adorns our quire,
Was Peter, he that with the widow gave
To holy church his treasure.  The fifth light,
Goodliest of all, is by such love inspired,
That all your world craves tidings of its doom:
Within, there is the lofty light, endow'd
With sapience so profound, if truth be truth,
That with a ken of such wide amplitude
No second hath arisen.  Next behold
That taper's radiance, to whose view was shown,
Clearliest, the nature and the ministry
Angelical, while yet in flesh it dwelt.
In the other little light serenely smiles
That pleader for the Christian temples, he
Who did provide Augustin of his lore.
Now, if thy mind's eye pass from light to light,
Upon my praises following, of the eighth
Thy thirst is next.  The saintly soul, that shows
The world's deceitfulness, to all who hear him,
Is, with the sight of all the good, that is,
Blest there.  The limbs, whence it was driven, lie
Down in Cieldauro, and from martyrdom
And exile came it here.  Lo! further on,
Where flames the arduous Spirit of Isidore,
Of Bede, and Richard, more than man, erewhile,
In deep discernment.  Lastly this, from whom
Thy look on me reverteth, was the beam
Of one, whose spirit, on high musings bent,
Rebuk'd the ling'ring tardiness of death.
It is the eternal light of Sigebert,
Who 'scap'd not envy, when of truth he argued,
Reading in the straw-litter'd street."  Forthwith,
As clock, that calleth up the spouse of God
To win her bridegroom's love at matin's hour,
Each part of other fitly drawn and urg'd,
Sends out a tinkling sound, of note so sweet,
Affection springs in well-disposed breast;
Thus saw I move the glorious wheel, thus heard
Voice answ'ring voice, so musical and soft,
It can be known but where day endless shines.






O fond anxiety of mortal men!
How vain and inconclusive arguments
Are those, which make thee beat thy wings below
For statues one, and one for aphorisms
Was hunting; this the priesthood follow'd, that
By force or sophistry aspir'd to rule;
To rob another, and another sought
By civil business wealth; one moiling lay
Tangled in net of sensual delight,
And one to witless indolence resign'd;
What time from all these empty things escap'd,
With Beatrice, I thus gloriously
Was rais'd aloft, and made the guest of heav'n.

They of the circle to that point, each one.
Where erst it was, had turn'd; and steady glow'd,
As candle in his socket.  Then within
The lustre, that erewhile bespake me, smiling
With merer gladness, heard I thus begin:

"E'en as his beam illumes me, so I look
Into the eternal light, and clearly mark
Thy thoughts, from whence they rise.  Thou art in doubt,
And wouldst, that I should bolt my words afresh
In such plain open phrase, as may be smooth
To thy perception, where I told thee late
That 'well they thrive;' and that 'no second such
Hath risen,' which no small distinction needs.

"The providence, that governeth the world,
In depth of counsel by created ken
Unfathomable, to the end that she,
Who with loud cries was 'spous'd in precious blood,
Might keep her footing towards her well-belov'd,
Safe in herself and constant unto him,
Hath two ordain'd, who should on either hand
In chief escort her: one seraphic all
In fervency; for wisdom upon earth,
The other splendour of cherubic light.
I but of one will tell: he tells of both,
Who one commendeth which of them so'er
Be taken: for their deeds were to one end.

"Between Tupino, and the wave, that falls
From blest Ubaldo's chosen hill, there hangs
Rich slope of mountain high, whence heat and cold
Are wafted through Perugia's eastern gate:
And Norcera with Gualdo, in its rear
Mourn for their heavy yoke.  Upon that side,
Where it doth break its steepness most, arose
A sun upon the world, as duly this
From Ganges doth: therefore let none, who speak
Of that place, say Ascesi; for its name
Were lamely so deliver'd; but the East,
To call things rightly, be it henceforth styl'd.
He was not yet much distant from his rising,
When his good influence 'gan to bless the earth.
A dame to whom none openeth pleasure's gate
More than to death, was, 'gainst his father's will,
His stripling choice: and he did make her his,
Before the Spiritual court, by nuptial bonds,
And in his father's sight: from day to day,
Then lov'd her more devoutly.  She, bereav'd
Of her first husband, slighted and obscure,
Thousand and hundred years and more, remain'd
Without a single suitor, till he came.
Nor aught avail'd, that, with Amyclas, she
Was found unmov'd at rumour of his voice,
Who shook the world: nor aught her constant boldness
Whereby with Christ she mounted on the cross,
When Mary stay'd beneath.  But not to deal
Thus closely with thee longer, take at large
The rovers' titles--Poverty and Francis.
Their concord and glad looks, wonder and love,
And sweet regard gave birth to holy thoughts,
So much, that venerable Bernard first
Did bare his feet, and, in pursuit of peace
So heavenly, ran, yet deem'd his footing slow.
O hidden riches!  O prolific good!
Egidius bares him next, and next Sylvester,
And follow both the bridegroom; so the bride
Can please them.  Thenceforth goes he on his way,
The father and the master, with his spouse,
And with that family, whom now the cord
Girt humbly: nor did abjectness of heart
Weigh down his eyelids, for that he was son
Of Pietro Bernardone, and by men
In wond'rous sort despis'd.  But royally
His hard intention he to Innocent
Set forth, and from him first receiv'd the seal
On his religion.  Then, when numerous flock'd
The tribe of lowly ones, that trac'd HIS steps,
Whose marvellous life deservedly were sung
In heights empyreal, through Honorius' hand
A second crown, to deck their Guardian's virtues,
Was by the eternal Spirit inwreath'd: and when
He had, through thirst of martyrdom, stood up
In the proud Soldan's presence, and there preach'd
Christ and his followers; but found the race
Unripen'd for conversion: back once more
He hasted (not to intermit his toil),
And reap'd Ausonian lands.  On the hard rock,
'Twixt Arno and the Tyber, he from Christ
Took the last Signet, which his limbs two years
Did carry.  Then the season come, that he,
Who to such good had destin'd him, was pleas'd
T' advance him to the meed, which he had earn'd
By his self-humbling, to his brotherhood,
As their just heritage, he gave in charge
His dearest lady, and enjoin'd their love
And faith to her: and, from her bosom, will'd
His goodly spirit should move forth, returning
To its appointed kingdom, nor would have
His body laid upon another bier.

"Think now of one, who were a fit colleague,
To keep the bark of Peter in deep sea
Helm'd to right point; and such our Patriarch was.
Therefore who follow him, as he enjoins,
Thou mayst be certain, take good lading in.
But hunger of new viands tempts his flock,
So that they needs into strange pastures wide
Must spread them: and the more remote from him
The stragglers wander, so much mole they come
Home to the sheep-fold, destitute of milk.
There are of them, in truth, who fear their harm,
And to the shepherd cleave; but these so few,
A little stuff may furnish out their cloaks.

"Now, if my words be clear, if thou have ta'en
Good heed, if that, which I have told, recall
To mind, thy wish may be in part fulfill'd:
For thou wilt see the point from whence they split,
Nor miss of the reproof, which that implies,
'That well they thrive not sworn with vanity."'






Soon as its final word the blessed flame
Had rais'd for utterance, straight the holy mill
Began to wheel, nor yet had once revolv'd,
Or ere another, circling, compass'd it,
Motion to motion, song to song, conjoining,
Song, that as much our muses doth excel,
Our Sirens with their tuneful pipes, as ray
Of primal splendour doth its faint reflex.

As when, if Juno bid her handmaid forth,
Two arches parallel, and trick'd alike,
Span the thin cloud, the outer taking birth
From that within (in manner of that voice
Whom love did melt away, as sun the mist),
And they who gaze, presageful call to mind
The compact, made with Noah, of the world
No more to be o'erflow'd; about us thus
Of sempiternal roses, bending, wreath'd
Those garlands twain, and to the innermost
E'en thus th' external answered.  When the footing,
And other great festivity, of song,
And radiance, light with light accordant, each
Jocund and blythe, had at their pleasure still'd
(E'en as the eyes by quick volition mov'd,
Are shut and rais'd together), from the heart
Of one amongst the new lights mov'd a voice,
That made me seem like needle to the star,
In turning to its whereabout, and thus
Began: "The love, that makes me beautiful,
Prompts me to tell of th' other guide, for whom
Such good of mine is spoken.  Where one is,
The other worthily should also be;
That as their warfare was alike, alike
Should be their glory.  Slow, and full of doubt,
And with thin ranks, after its banner mov'd
The army of Christ (which it so clearly cost
To reappoint), when its imperial Head,
Who reigneth ever, for the drooping host
Did make provision, thorough grace alone,
And not through its deserving.  As thou heard'st,
Two champions to the succour of his spouse
He sent, who by their deeds and words might join
Again his scatter'd people.  In that clime,
Where springs the pleasant west-wind to unfold
The fresh leaves, with which Europe sees herself
New-garmented; nor from those billows far,
Beyond whose chiding, after weary course,
The sun doth sometimes hide him, safe abides
The happy Callaroga, under guard
Of the great shield, wherein the lion lies
Subjected and supreme.  And there was born
The loving million of the Christian faith,
The hollow'd wrestler, gentle to his own,
And to his enemies terrible.  So replete
His soul with lively virtue, that when first
Created, even in the mother's womb,
It prophesied.  When, at the sacred font,
The spousals were complete 'twixt faith and him,
Where pledge of mutual safety was exchang'd,
The dame, who was his surety, in her sleep
Beheld the wondrous fruit, that was from him
And from his heirs to issue.  And that such
He might be construed, as indeed he was,
She was inspir'd to name him of his owner,
Whose he was wholly, and so call'd him Dominic.
And I speak of him, as the labourer,
Whom Christ in his own garden chose to be
His help-mate.  Messenger he seem'd, and friend
Fast-knit to Christ; and the first love he show'd,
Was after the first counsel that Christ gave.
Many a time his nurse, at entering found
That he had ris'n in silence, and was prostrate,
As who should say, "My errand was for this."
O happy father!  Felix rightly nam'd!
O favour'd mother! rightly nam'd Joanna!
If that do mean, as men interpret it.
Not for the world's sake, for which now they pore
Upon Ostiense and Taddeo's page,
But for the real manna, soon he grew
Mighty in learning, and did set himself
To go about the vineyard, that soon turns
To wan and wither'd, if not tended well:
And from the see (whose bounty to the just
And needy is gone by, not through its fault,
But his who fills it basely, he besought,
No dispensation for commuted wrong,
Nor the first vacant fortune, nor the tenth),
That to God's paupers rightly appertain,
But, 'gainst an erring and degenerate world,
Licence to fight, in favour of that seed,
From which the twice twelve cions gird thee round.
Then, with sage doctrine and good will to help,
Forth on his great apostleship he far'd,
Like torrent bursting from a lofty vein;
And, dashing 'gainst the stocks of heresy,
Smote fiercest, where resistance was most stout.
Thence many rivulets have since been turn'd,
Over the garden Catholic to lead
Their living waters, and have fed its plants.

"If such one wheel of that two-yoked car,
Wherein the holy church defended her,
And rode triumphant through the civil broil.
Thou canst not doubt its fellow's excellence,
Which Thomas, ere my coming, hath declar'd
So courteously unto thee.  But the track,
Which its smooth fellies made, is now deserted:
That mouldy mother is where late were lees.
His family, that wont to trace his path,
Turn backward, and invert their steps; erelong
To rue the gathering in of their ill crop,
When the rejected tares in vain shall ask
Admittance to the barn.  I question not
But he, who search'd our volume, leaf by leaf,
Might still find page with this inscription on't,
'I am as I was wont.'  Yet such were not
From Acquasparta nor Casale, whence
Of those, who come to meddle with the text,
One stretches and another cramps its rule.
Bonaventura's life in me behold,
From Bagnororegio, one, who in discharge
Of my great offices still laid aside
All sinister aim.  Illuminato here,
And Agostino join me: two they were,
Among the first of those barefooted meek ones,
Who sought God's friendship in the cord: with them
Hugues of Saint Victor, Pietro Mangiadore,
And he of Spain in his twelve volumes shining,
Nathan the prophet, Metropolitan
Chrysostom, and Anselmo, and, who deign'd
To put his hand to the first art, Donatus.
Raban is here: and at my side there shines
Calabria's abbot, Joachim, endow'd
With soul prophetic.  The bright courtesy
Of friar Thomas, and his goodly lore,
Have mov'd me to the blazon of a peer
So worthy, and with me have mov'd this throng."






Let him, who would conceive what now I saw,
Imagine (and retain the image firm,
As mountain rock, the whilst he hears me speak),
Of stars fifteen, from midst the ethereal host
Selected, that, with lively ray serene,
O'ercome the massiest air: thereto imagine
The wain, that, in the bosom of our sky,
Spins ever on its axle night and day,
With the bright summit of that horn which swells
Due from the pole, round which the first wheel rolls,
T' have rang'd themselves in fashion of two signs
In heav'n, such as Ariadne made,
When death's chill seized her; and that one of them
Did compass in the other's beam; and both
In such sort whirl around, that each should tend
With opposite motion and, conceiving thus,
Of that true constellation, and the dance
Twofold, that circled me, he shall attain
As 't were the shadow; for things there as much
Surpass our usage, as the swiftest heav'n
Is swifter than the Chiana.  There was sung
No Bacchus, and no Io Paean, but
Three Persons in the Godhead, and in one
Substance that nature and the human join'd.

The song fulfill'd its measure; and to us
Those saintly lights attended, happier made
At each new minist'ring.  Then silence brake,
Amid th' accordant sons of Deity,
That luminary, in which the wondrous life
Of the meek man of God was told to me;
And thus it spake: "One ear o' th' harvest thresh'd,
And its grain safely stor'd, sweet charity
Invites me with the other to like toil.

"Thou know'st, that in the bosom, whence the rib
Was ta'en to fashion that fair cheek, whose taste
All the world pays for, and in that, which pierc'd
By the keen lance, both after and before
Such satisfaction offer'd, as outweighs
Each evil in the scale, whate'er of light
To human nature is allow'd, must all
Have by his virtue been infus'd, who form'd
Both one and other: and thou thence admir'st
In that I told thee, of beatitudes
A second, there is none, to his enclos'd
In the fifth radiance.  Open now thine eyes
To what I answer thee; and thou shalt see
Thy deeming and my saying meet in truth,
As centre in the round.  That which dies not,
And that which can die, are but each the beam
Of that idea, which our Soverign Sire
Engendereth loving; for that lively light,
Which passeth from his brightness; not disjoin'd
From him, nor from his love triune with them,
Doth, through his bounty, congregate itself,
Mirror'd, as 't were in new existences,
Itself unalterable and ever one.

"Descending hence unto the lowest powers,
Its energy so sinks, at last it makes
But brief contingencies: for so I name
Things generated, which the heav'nly orbs
Moving, with seed or without seed, produce.
Their wax, and that which molds it, differ much:
And thence with lustre, more or less, it shows
Th' ideal stamp impress: so that one tree
According to his kind, hath better fruit,
And worse: and, at your birth, ye, mortal men,
Are in your talents various.  Were the wax
Molded with nice exactness, and the heav'n
In its disposing influence supreme,
The lustre of the seal should be complete:
But nature renders it imperfect ever,
Resembling thus the artist in her work,
Whose faultering hand is faithless to his skill.
Howe'er, if love itself dispose, and mark
The primal virtue, kindling with bright view,
There all perfection is vouchsafed; and such
The clay was made, accomplish'd with each gift,
That life can teem with; such the burden fill'd
The virgin's bosom: so that I commend
Thy judgment, that the human nature ne'er
Was or can be, such as in them it was.

"Did I advance no further than this point,
'How then had he no peer?'  thou might'st reply.
But, that what now appears not, may appear
Right plainly, ponder, who he was, and what
(When he was bidden 'Ask' ), the motive sway'd
To his requesting.  I have spoken thus,
That thou mayst see, he was a king, who ask'd
For wisdom, to the end he might be king
Sufficient: not the number to search out
Of the celestial movers; or to know,
If necessary with contingent e'er
Have made necessity; or whether that
Be granted, that first motion is; or if
Of the mid circle can, by art, be made
Triangle with each corner, blunt or sharp.

"Whence, noting that, which I have said, and this,
Thou kingly prudence and that ken mayst learn,
At which the dart of my intention aims.
And, marking clearly, that I told thee, 'Risen,'
Thou shalt discern it only hath respect
To kings, of whom are many, and the good
Are rare.  With this distinction take my words;
And they may well consist with that which thou
Of the first human father dost believe,
And of our well-beloved.  And let this
Henceforth be led unto thy feet, to make
Thee slow in motion, as a weary man,
Both to the 'yea' and to the 'nay' thou seest not.
For he among the fools is down full low,
Whose affirmation, or denial, is
Without distinction, in each case alike
Since it befalls, that in most instances
Current opinion leads to false: and then
Affection bends the judgment to her ply.

"Much more than vainly doth he loose from shore,
Since he returns not such as he set forth,
Who fishes for the truth and wanteth skill.
And open proofs of this unto the world
Have been afforded in Parmenides,
Melissus, Bryso, and the crowd beside,
Who journey'd on, and knew not whither: so did
Sabellius, Arius, and the other fools,
Who, like to scymitars, reflected back
The scripture-image, by distortion marr'd.

"Let not the people be too swift to judge,
As one who reckons on the blades in field,
Or ere the crop be ripe.  For I have seen
The thorn frown rudely all the winter long
And after bear the rose upon its top;
And bark, that all the way across the sea
Ran straight and speedy, perish at the last,
E'en in the haven's mouth seeing one steal,
Another brine, his offering to the priest,
Let not Dame Birtha and Sir Martin thence
Into heav'n's counsels deem that they can pry:
For one of these may rise, the other fall."






From centre to the circle, and so back
From circle to the centre, water moves
In the round chalice, even as the blow
Impels it, inwardly, or from without.
Such was the image glanc'd into my mind,
As the great spirit of Aquinum ceas'd;
And Beatrice after him her words
Resum'd alternate: "Need there is (tho' yet
He tells it to you not in words, nor e'en
In thought) that he should fathom to its depth
Another mystery.  Tell him, if the light,
Wherewith your substance blooms, shall stay with you
Eternally, as now: and, if it doth,
How, when ye shall regain your visible forms,
The sight may without harm endure the change,
That also tell."  As those, who in a ring
Tread the light measure, in their fitful mirth
Raise loud the voice, and spring with gladder bound;
Thus, at the hearing of that pious suit,
The saintly circles in their tourneying
And wond'rous note attested new delight.

Whoso laments, that we must doff this garb
Of frail mortality, thenceforth to live
Immortally above, he hath not seen
The sweet refreshing, of that heav'nly shower.

Him, who lives ever, and for ever reigns
In mystic union of the Three in One,
Unbounded, bounding all, each spirit thrice
Sang, with such melody, as but to hear
For highest merit were an ample meed.
And from the lesser orb the goodliest light,
With gentle voice and mild, such as perhaps
The angel's once to Mary, thus replied:
"Long as the joy of Paradise shall last,
Our love shall shine around that raiment, bright,
As fervent; fervent, as in vision blest;
And that as far in blessedness exceeding,
As it hath grave beyond its virtue great.
Our shape, regarmented with glorious weeds
Of saintly flesh, must, being thus entire,
Show yet more gracious.  Therefore shall increase,
Whate'er of light, gratuitous, imparts
The Supreme Good; light, ministering aid,
The better disclose his glory: whence
The vision needs increasing, much increase
The fervour, which it kindles; and that too
The ray, that comes from it.  But as the greed
Which gives out flame, yet it its whiteness shines
More lively than that, and so preserves
Its proper semblance; thus this circling sphere
Of splendour, shall to view less radiant seem,
Than shall our fleshly robe, which yonder earth
Now covers.  Nor will such excess of light
O'erpower us, in corporeal organs made
Firm, and susceptible of all delight."

So ready and so cordial an "Amen,"
Followed from either choir, as plainly spoke
Desire of their dead bodies; yet perchance
Not for themselves, but for their kindred dear,
Mothers and sires, and those whom best they lov'd,
Ere they were made imperishable flame.

And lo! forthwith there rose up round about
A lustre over that already there,
Of equal clearness, like the brightening up
Of the horizon.  As at an evening hour
Of twilight, new appearances through heav'n
Peer with faint glimmer, doubtfully descried;
So there new substances, methought began
To rise in view; and round the other twain
Enwheeling, sweep their ampler circuit wide.

O gentle glitter of eternal beam!
With what a such whiteness did it flow,
O'erpowering vision in me!  But so fair,
So passing lovely, Beatrice show'd,
Mind cannot follow it, nor words express
Her infinite sweetness.  Thence mine eyes regain'd
Power to look up, and I beheld myself,
Sole with my lady, to more lofty bliss
Translated: for the star, with warmer smile
Impurpled, well denoted our ascent.

With all the heart, and with that tongue which speaks
The same in all, an holocaust I made
To God, befitting the new grace vouchsaf'd.
And from my bosom had not yet upsteam'd
The fuming of that incense, when I knew
The rite accepted.  With such mighty sheen
And mantling crimson, in two listed rays
The splendours shot before me, that I cried,
"God of Sabaoth! that does prank them thus!"

As leads the galaxy from pole to pole,
Distinguish'd into greater lights and less,
Its pathway, which the wisest fail to spell;
So thickly studded, in the depth of Mars,
Those rays describ'd the venerable sign,
That quadrants in the round conjoining frame.
Here memory mocks the toil of genius.  Christ
Beam'd on that cross; and pattern fails me now.
But whoso takes his cross, and follows Christ
Will pardon me for that I leave untold,
When in the flecker'd dawning he shall spy
The glitterance of Christ.  From horn to horn,
And 'tween the summit and the base did move
Lights, scintillating, as they met and pass'd.
Thus oft are seen, with ever-changeful glance,
Straight or athwart, now rapid and now slow,
The atomies of bodies, long or short,
To move along the sunbeam, whose slant line
Checkers the shadow, interpos'd by art
Against the noontide heat.  And as the chime
Of minstrel music, dulcimer, and help
With many strings, a pleasant dining makes
To him, who heareth not distinct the note;
So from the lights, which there appear'd to me,
Gather'd along the cross a melody,
That, indistinctly heard, with ravishment
Possess'd me.  Yet I mark'd it was a hymn
Of lofty praises; for there came to me
"Arise and conquer," as to one who hears
And comprehends not.  Me such ecstasy
O'ercame, that never till that hour was thing
That held me in so sweet imprisonment.

Perhaps my saying over bold appears,
Accounting less the pleasure of those eyes,
Whereon to look fulfilleth all desire.
But he, who is aware those living seals
Of every beauty work with quicker force,
The higher they are ris'n; and that there
I had not turn'd me to them; he may well
Excuse me that, whereof in my excuse
I do accuse me, and may own my truth;
That holy pleasure here not yet reveal'd,
Which grows in transport as we mount aloof.






True love, that ever shows itself as clear
In kindness, as loose appetite in wrong,
Silenced that lyre harmonious, and still'd
The sacred chords, that are by heav'n's right hand
Unwound and tighten'd, flow to righteous prayers
Should they not hearken, who, to give me will
For praying, in accordance thus were mute?
He hath in sooth good cause for endless grief,
Who, for the love of thing that lasteth not,
Despoils himself forever of that love.

As oft along the still and pure serene,
At nightfall, glides a sudden trail of fire,
Attracting with involuntary heed
The eye to follow it, erewhile at rest,
And seems some star that shifted place in heav'n,
Only that, whence it kindles, none is lost,
And it is soon extinct; thus from the horn,
That on the dexter of the cross extends,
Down to its foot, one luminary ran
From mid the cluster shone there; yet no gem
Dropp'd from its foil; and through the beamy list
Like flame in alabaster, glow'd its course.

So forward stretch'd him (if of credence aught
Our greater muse may claim) the pious ghost
Of old Anchises, in the' Elysian bower,
When he perceiv'd his son.  "O thou, my blood!
O most exceeding grace divine! to whom,
As now to thee, hath twice the heav'nly gate
Been e'er unclos'd?" so spake the light; whence I
Turn'd me toward him; then unto my dame
My sight directed, and on either side
Amazement waited me; for in her eyes
Was lighted such a smile, I thought that mine
Had div'd unto the bottom of my grace
And of my bliss in Paradise.  Forthwith
To hearing and to sight grateful alike,
The spirit to his proem added things
I understood not, so profound he spake;
Yet not of choice but through necessity
Mysterious; for his high conception scar'd
Beyond the mark of mortals.  When the flight
Of holy transport had so spent its rage,
That nearer to the level of our thought
The speech descended, the first sounds I heard
Were, "Best he thou, Triunal Deity!
That hast such favour in my seed vouchsaf'd!"
Then follow'd: "No unpleasant thirst, tho' long,
Which took me reading in the sacred book,
Whose leaves or white or dusky never change,
Thou hast allay'd, my son, within this light,
From whence my voice thou hear'st; more thanks to her.
Who for such lofty mounting has with plumes
Begirt thee.  Thou dost deem thy thoughts to me
From him transmitted, who is first of all,
E'en as all numbers ray from unity;
And therefore dost not ask me who I am,
Or why to thee more joyous I appear,
Than any other in this gladsome throng.
The truth is as thou deem'st; for in this hue
Both less and greater in that mirror look,
In which thy thoughts, or ere thou think'st, are shown.
But, that the love, which keeps me wakeful ever,
Urging with sacred thirst of sweet desire,
May be contended fully, let thy voice,
Fearless, and frank and jocund, utter forth
Thy will distinctly, utter forth the wish,
Whereto my ready answer stands decreed."

I turn'd me to Beatrice; and she heard
Ere I had spoken, smiling, an assent,
That to my will gave wings; and I began
"To each among your tribe, what time ye kenn'd
The nature, in whom naught unequal dwells,
Wisdom and love were in one measure dealt;
For that they are so equal in the sun,
From whence ye drew your radiance and your heat,
As makes all likeness scant.  But will and means,
In mortals, for the cause ye well discern,
With unlike wings are fledge.  A mortal I
Experience inequality like this,
And therefore give no thanks, but in the heart,
For thy paternal greeting.  This howe'er
I pray thee, living topaz! that ingemm'st
This precious jewel, let me hear thy name."

"I am thy root, O leaf! whom to expect
Even, hath pleas'd me:" thus the prompt reply
Prefacing, next it added; "he, of whom
Thy kindred appellation comes, and who,
These hundred years and more, on its first ledge
Hath circuited the mountain, was my son
And thy great grandsire.  Well befits, his long
Endurance should be shorten'd by thy deeds.

"Florence, within her ancient limit-mark,
Which calls her still to matin prayers and noon,
Was chaste and sober, and abode in peace.
She had no armlets and no head-tires then,
No purfled dames, no zone, that caught the eye
More than the person did.  Time was not yet,
When at his daughter's birth the sire grew pale.
For fear the age and dowry should exceed
On each side just proportion.  House was none
Void of its family; nor yet had come
Hardanapalus, to exhibit feats
Of chamber prowess.  Montemalo yet
O'er our suburban turret rose; as much
To be surpass in fall, as in its rising.
I saw Bellincione Berti walk abroad
In leathern girdle and a clasp of bone;
And, with no artful colouring on her cheeks,
His lady leave the glass.  The sons I saw
Of Nerli and of Vecchio well content
With unrob'd jerkin; and their good dames handling
The spindle and the flax; O happy they!
Each sure of burial in her native land,
And none left desolate a-bed for France!
One wak'd to tend the cradle, hushing it
With sounds that lull'd the parent's infancy:
Another, with her maidens, drawing off
The tresses from the distaff, lectur'd them
Old tales of Troy and Fesole and Rome.
A Salterello and Cianghella we
Had held as strange a marvel, as ye would
A Cincinnatus or Cornelia now.

"In such compos'd and seemly fellowship,
Such faithful and such fair equality,
In so sweet household, Mary at my birth
Bestow'd me, call'd on with loud cries; and there
In your old baptistery, I was made
Christian at once and Cacciaguida; as were
My brethren, Eliseo and Moronto.

"From Valdipado came to me my spouse,
And hence thy surname grew.  I follow'd then
The Emperor Conrad; and his knighthood he
Did gird on me; in such good part he took
My valiant service.  After him I went
To testify against that evil law,
Whose people, by the shepherd's fault, possess
Your right, usurping.  There, by that foul crew
Was I releas'd from the deceitful world,
Whose base affection many a spirit soils,
And from the martyrdom came to this peace."






O slight respect of man's nobility!
I never shall account it marvelous,
That our infirm affection here below
Thou mov'st to boasting, when I could not choose,
E'en in that region of unwarp'd desire,
In heav'n itself, but make my vaunt in thee!
Yet cloak thou art soon shorten'd, for that time,
Unless thou be eked out from day to day,
Goes round thee with his shears.  Resuming then
With greeting such, as Rome, was first to bear,
But since hath disaccustom'd I began;
And Beatrice, that a little space
Was sever'd, smil'd reminding me of her,
Whose cough embolden'd (as the story holds)
To first offence the doubting Guenever.

"You are my sire," said I, "you give me heart
Freely to speak my thought: above myself
You raise me.  Through so many streams with joy
My soul is fill'd, that gladness wells from it;
So that it bears the mighty tide, and bursts not
Say then, my honour'd stem! what ancestors
Where those you sprang from, and what years were mark'd
In your first childhood?  Tell me of the fold,
That hath Saint John for guardian, what was then
Its state, and who in it were highest seated?"

As embers, at the breathing of the wind,
Their flame enliven, so that light I saw
Shine at my blandishments; and, as it grew
More fair to look on, so with voice more sweet,
Yet not in this our modern phrase, forthwith
It answer'd: "From the day, when it was said
'Hail Virgin!' to the throes, by which my mother,
Who now is sainted, lighten'd her of me
Whom she was heavy with, this fire had come,
Five hundred fifty times and thrice, its beams
To reilumine underneath the foot
Of its own lion.  They, of whom I sprang,
And I, had there our birth-place, where the last
Partition of our city first is reach'd
By him, that runs her annual game.  Thus much
Suffice of my forefathers: who they were,
And whence they hither came, more honourable
It is to pass in silence than to tell.
All those, who in that time were there from Mars
Until the Baptist, fit to carry arms,
Were but the fifth of them this day alive.
But then the citizen's blood, that now is mix'd
From Campi and Certaldo and Fighine,
Ran purely through the last mechanic's veins.
O how much better were it, that these people
Were neighbours to you, and that at Galluzzo
And at Trespiano, ye should have your bound'ry,
Than to have them within, and bear the stench
Of Aguglione's hind, and Signa's, him,
That hath his eye already keen for bart'ring!
Had not the people, which of all the world
Degenerates most, been stepdame unto Caesar,
But, as a mother, gracious to her son;
Such one, as hath become a Florentine,
And trades and traffics, had been turn'd adrift
To Simifonte, where his grandsire ply'd
The beggar's craft.  The Conti were possess'd
Of Montemurlo still: the Cerchi still
Were in Acone's parish; nor had haply
From Valdigrieve past the Buondelmonte.
The city's malady hath ever source
In the confusion of its persons, as
The body's, in variety of food:
And the blind bull falls with a steeper plunge,
Than the blind lamb; and oftentimes one sword
Doth more and better execution,
Than five.  Mark Luni, Urbisaglia mark,
How they are gone, and after them how go
Chiusi and Sinigaglia; and 't will seem
No longer new or strange to thee to hear,
That families fail, when cities have their end.
All things, that appertain t' ye, like yourselves,
Are mortal: but mortality in some
Ye mark not, they endure so long, and you
Pass by so suddenly.  And as the moon
Doth, by the rolling of her heav'nly sphere,
Hide and reveal the strand unceasingly;
So fortune deals with Florence.  Hence admire not
At what of them I tell thee, whose renown
Time covers, the first Florentines.  I saw
The Ughi, Catilini and Filippi,
The Alberichi, Greci and Ormanni,
Now in their wane, illustrious citizens:
And great as ancient, of Sannella him,
With him of Arca saw, and Soldanieri
And Ardinghi, and Bostichi.  At the poop,
That now is laden with new felony,
So cumb'rous it may speedily sink the bark,
The Ravignani sat, of whom is sprung
The County Guido, and whoso hath since
His title from the fam'd Bellincione ta'en.
Fair governance was yet an art well priz'd
By him of Pressa: Galigaio show'd
The gilded hilt and pommel, in his house.
The column, cloth'd with verrey, still was seen
Unshaken: the Sacchetti still were great,
Giouchi, Sifanti, Galli and Barucci,
With them who blush to hear the bushel nam'd.
Of the Calfucci still the branchy trunk
Was in its strength: and to the curule chairs
Sizii and Arigucci yet were drawn.
How mighty them I saw, whom since their pride
Hath undone! and in all her goodly deeds
Florence was by the bullets of bright gold
O'erflourish'd.  Such the sires of those, who now,
As surely as your church is vacant, flock
Into her consistory, and at leisure
There stall them and grow fat.  The o'erweening brood,
That plays the dragon after him that flees,
But unto such, as turn and show the tooth,
Ay or the purse, is gentle as a lamb,
Was on its rise, but yet so slight esteem'd,
That Ubertino of Donati grudg'd
His father-in-law should yoke him to its tribe.
Already Caponsacco had descended
Into the mart from Fesole: and Giuda
And Infangato were good citizens.
A thing incredible I tell, tho' true:
The gateway, named from those of Pera, led
Into the narrow circuit of your walls.
Each one, who bears the sightly quarterings
Of the great Baron (he whose name and worth
The festival of Thomas still revives)
His knighthood and his privilege retain'd;
Albeit one, who borders them With gold,
This day is mingled with the common herd.
In Borgo yet the Gualterotti dwelt,
And Importuni: well for its repose
Had it still lack'd of newer neighbourhood.
The house, from whence your tears have had their spring,
Through the just anger that hath murder'd ye
And put a period to your gladsome days,
Was honour'd, it, and those consorted with it.
O Buondelmonte! what ill counseling
Prevail'd on thee to break the plighted bond
Many, who now are weeping, would rejoice,
Had God to Ema giv'n thee, the first time
Thou near our city cam'st.  But so was doom'd:
On that maim'd stone set up to guard the bridge,
At thy last peace, the victim, Florence! fell.
With these and others like to them, I saw
Florence in such assur'd tranquility,
She had no cause at which to grieve: with these
Saw her so glorious and so just, that ne'er
The lily from the lance had hung reverse,
Or through division been with vermeil dyed."






Such as the youth, who came to Clymene
To certify himself of that reproach,
Which had been fasten'd on him, (he whose end
Still makes the fathers chary to their sons),
E'en such was I; nor unobserv'd was such
Of Beatrice, and that saintly lamp,
Who had erewhile for me his station mov'd;
When thus by lady: "Give thy wish free vent,
That it may issue, bearing true report
Of the mind's impress; not that aught thy words
May to our knowledge add, but to the end,
That thou mayst use thyself to own thy thirst
And men may mingle for thee when they hear."

"O plant! from whence I spring! rever'd and lov'd!
Who soar'st so high a pitch, thou seest as clear,
As earthly thought determines two obtuse
In one triangle not contain'd, so clear
Dost see contingencies, ere in themselves
Existent, looking at the point whereto
All times are present, I, the whilst I scal'd
With Virgil the soul purifying mount,
And visited the nether world of woe,
Touching my future destiny have heard
Words grievous, though I feel me on all sides
Well squar'd to fortune's blows.  Therefore my will
Were satisfied to know the lot awaits me,
The arrow, seen beforehand, slacks its flight."

So said I to the brightness, which erewhile
To me had spoken, and my will declar'd,
As Beatrice will'd, explicitly.
Nor with oracular response obscure,
Such, as or ere the Lamb of God was slain,
Beguil'd the credulous nations; but, in terms
Precise and unambiguous lore, replied
The spirit of paternal love, enshrin'd,
Yet in his smile apparent; and thus spake:
"Contingency, unfolded not to view
Upon the tablet of your mortal mold,
Is all depictur'd in the' eternal sight;
But hence deriveth not necessity,
More then the tall ship, hurried down the flood,
Doth from the vision, that reflects the scene.
From thence, as to the ear sweet harmony
From organ comes, so comes before mine eye
The time prepar'd for thee.  Such as driv'n out
From Athens, by his cruel stepdame's wiles,
Hippolytus departed, such must thou
Depart from Florence.  This they wish, and this
Contrive, and will ere long effectuate, there,
Where gainful merchandize is made of Christ,
Throughout the livelong day.  The common cry,
Will, as 't is ever wont, affix the blame
Unto the party injur'd: but the truth
Shall, in the vengeance it dispenseth, find
A faithful witness.  Thou shall leave each thing
Belov'd most dearly: this is the first shaft
Shot from the bow of exile.  Thou shalt prove
How salt the savour is of other's bread,
How hard the passage to descend and climb
By other's stairs, But that shall gall thee most
Will be the worthless and vile company,
With whom thou must be thrown into these straits.
For all ungrateful, impious all and mad,
Shall turn 'gainst thee: but in a little while
Theirs and not thine shall be the crimson'd brow
Their course shall so evince their brutishness
T' have ta'en thy stand apart shall well become thee.

"First refuge thou must find, first place of rest,
In the great Lombard's courtesy, who bears
Upon the ladder perch'd the sacred bird.
He shall behold thee with such kind regard,
That 'twixt ye two, the contrary to that
Which falls 'twixt other men, the granting shall
Forerun the asking.  With him shalt thou see
That mortal, who was at his birth impress
So strongly from this star, that of his deeds
The nations shall take note.  His unripe age
Yet holds him from observance; for these wheels
Only nine years have compass him about.
But, ere the Gascon practice on great Harry,
Sparkles of virtue shall shoot forth in him,
In equal scorn of labours and of gold.
His bounty shall be spread abroad so widely,
As not to let the tongues e'en of his foes
Be idle in its praise.  Look thou to him
And his beneficence: for he shall cause
Reversal of their lot to many people,
Rich men and beggars interchanging fortunes.
And thou shalt bear this written in thy soul
Of him, but tell it not;" and things he told
Incredible to those who witness them;
Then added: "So interpret thou, my son,
What hath been told thee.--Lo! the ambushment
That a few circling seasons hide for thee!
Yet envy not thy neighbours: time extends
Thy span beyond their treason's chastisement."

Soon, as the saintly spirit, by his silence,
Had shown the web, which I had streteh'd for him
Upon the warp, was woven, I began,
As one, who in perplexity desires
Counsel of other, wise, benign and friendly:
"My father! well I mark how time spurs on
Toward me, ready to inflict the blow,
Which falls most heavily on him, who most
Abandoned himself.  Therefore 't is good
I should forecast, that driven from the place
Most dear to me, I may not lose myself
All others by my song.  Down through the world
Of infinite mourning, and along the mount
From whose fair height my lady's eyes did lift me,
And after through this heav'n from light to light,
Have I learnt that, which if I tell again,
It may with many woefully disrelish;
And, if I am a timid friend to truth,
I fear my life may perish among those,
To whom these days shall be of ancient date."

The brightness, where enclos'd the treasure smil'd,
Which I had found there, first shone glisteningly,
Like to a golden mirror in the sun;
Next answer'd: "Conscience, dimm'd or by its own
Or other's shame, will feel thy saying sharp.
Thou, notwithstanding, all deceit remov'd,
See the whole vision be made manifest.
And let them wince who have their withers wrung.
What though, when tasted first, thy voice shall prove
Unwelcome, on digestion it will turn
To vital nourishment.  The cry thou raisest,
Shall, as the wind doth, smite the proudest summits;
Which is of honour no light argument,
For this there only have been shown to thee,
Throughout these orbs, the mountain, and the deep,
Spirits, whom fame hath note of.  For the mind
Of him, who hears, is loth to acquiesce
And fix its faith, unless the instance brought
Be palpable, and proof apparent urge."








Now in his word, sole, ruminating, joy'd
That blessed spirit; and I fed on mine,
Tempting the sweet with bitter: she meanwhile,
Who led me unto God, admonish'd: "Muse
On other thoughts: bethink thee, that near Him
I dwell, who recompenseth every wrong."

At the sweet sounds of comfort straight I turn'd;
And, in the saintly eyes what love was seen,
I leave in silence here: nor through distrust
Of my words only, but that to such bliss
The mind remounts not without aid.  Thus much
Yet may I speak; that, as I gaz'd on her,
Affection found no room for other wish.
While the everlasting pleasure, that did full
On Beatrice shine, with second view
From her fair countenance my gladden'd soul
Contented; vanquishing me with a beam
Of her soft smile, she spake: "Turn thee, and list.
These eyes are not thy only Paradise."

As here we sometimes in the looks may see
Th' affection mark'd, when that its sway hath ta'en
The spirit wholly; thus the hallow'd light,
To whom I turn'd, flashing, bewray'd its will
To talk yet further with me, and began:
"On this fifth lodgment of the tree, whose life
Is from its top, whose fruit is ever fair
And leaf unwith'ring, blessed spirits abide,
That were below, ere they arriv'd in heav'n,
So mighty in renown, as every muse
Might grace her triumph with them.  On the horns
Look therefore of the cross: he, whom I name,
Shall there enact, as doth in summer cloud
Its nimble fire."  Along the cross I saw,
At the repeated name of Joshua,
A splendour gliding; nor, the word was said,
Ere it was done: then, at the naming saw
Of the great Maccabee, another move
With whirling speed; and gladness was the scourge
Unto that top.  The next for Charlemagne
And for the peer Orlando, two my gaze
Pursued, intently, as the eye pursues
A falcon flying.  Last, along the cross,
William, and Renard, and Duke Godfrey drew
My ken, and Robert Guiscard.  And the soul,
Who spake with me among the other lights
Did move away, and mix; and with the choir
Of heav'nly songsters prov'd his tuneful skill.

To Beatrice on my right l bent,
Looking for intimation or by word
Or act, what next behoov'd; and did descry
Such mere effulgence in her eyes, such joy,
It past all former wont.  And, as by sense
Of new delight, the man, who perseveres
In good deeds doth perceive from day to day
His virtue growing; I e'en thus perceiv'd
Of my ascent, together with the heav'n
The circuit widen'd, noting the increase
Of beauty in that wonder.  Like the change
In a brief moment on some maiden's cheek,
Which from its fairness doth discharge the weight
Of pudency, that stain'd it; such in her,
And to mine eyes so sudden was the change,
Through silvery whiteness of that temperate star,
Whose sixth orb now enfolded us.  I saw,
Within that Jovial cresset, the clear sparks
Of love, that reign'd there, fashion to my view
Our language.  And as birds, from river banks
Arisen, now in round, now lengthen'd troop,
Array them in their flight, greeting, as seems,
Their new-found pastures; so, within the lights,
The saintly creatures flying, sang, and made
Now D. now I. now L. figur'd I' th' air.

First, singing, to their notes they mov'd, then one
Becoming of these signs, a little while
Did rest them, and were mute.  O nymph divine
Of Pegasean race! whose souls, which thou
Inspir'st, mak'st glorious and long-liv'd, as they
Cities and realms by thee! thou with thyself
Inform me; that I may set forth the shapes,
As fancy doth present them.  Be thy power
Display'd in this brief song.  The characters,
Vocal and consonant, were five-fold seven.
In order each, as they appear'd, I mark'd.
Diligite Justitiam, the first,
Both verb and noun all blazon'd; and the extreme
Qui judicatis terram.  In the M.
Of the fifth word they held their station,
Making the star seem silver streak'd with gold.
And on the summit of the M. I saw
Descending other lights, that rested there,
Singing, methinks, their bliss and primal good.
Then, as at shaking of a lighted brand,
Sparkles innumerable on all sides
Rise scatter'd, source of augury to th' unwise;
Thus more than thousand twinkling lustres hence
Seem'd reascending, and a higher pitch
Some mounting, and some less; e'en as the sun,
Which kindleth them, decreed.  And when each one
Had settled in his place, the head and neck
Then saw I of an eagle, lively
Grav'd in that streaky fire.  Who painteth there,
Hath none to guide him; of himself he guides;
And every line and texture of the nest
Doth own from him the virtue, fashions it.
The other bright beatitude, that seem'd
Erewhile, with lilied crowning, well content
To over-canopy the M. mov'd forth,
Following gently the impress of the bird.

 Sweet star! what glorious and thick-studded gems
Declar'd to me our justice on the earth
To be the effluence of that heav'n, which thou,
Thyself a costly jewel, dost inlay!
Therefore I pray the Sovran Mind, from whom
Thy motion and thy virtue are begun,
That he would look from whence the fog doth rise,
To vitiate thy beam: so that once more
He may put forth his hand 'gainst such, as drive
Their traffic in that sanctuary, whose walls
With miracles and martyrdoms were built.

Ye host of heaven! whose glory I survey!
O beg ye grace for those, that are on earth
All after ill example gone astray.
War once had for its instrument the sword:
But now 't is made, taking the bread away
Which the good Father locks from none.  --And thou,
That writes but to cancel, think, that they,
Who for the vineyard, which thou wastest, died,
Peter and Paul live yet, and mark thy doings.
Thou hast good cause to cry, "My heart so cleaves
To him, that liv'd in solitude remote,
And from the wilds was dragg'd to martyrdom,
I wist not of the fisherman nor Paul."






Before my sight appear'd, with open wings,
The beauteous image, in fruition sweet
Gladdening the thronged spirits.  Each did seem
A little ruby, whereon so intense
The sun-beam glow'd that to mine eyes it came
In clear refraction.  And that, which next
Befalls me to portray, voice hath not utter'd,
Nor hath ink written, nor in fantasy
Was e'er conceiv'd.  For I beheld and heard
The beak discourse; and, what intention form'd
Of many, singly as of one express,
Beginning: "For that I was just and piteous,
l am exalted to this height of glory,
The which no wish exceeds: and there on earth
Have I my memory left, e'en by the bad
Commended, while they leave its course untrod."

Thus is one heat from many embers felt,
As in that image many were the loves,
And one the voice, that issued from them all.
Whence I address them: "O perennial flowers
Of gladness everlasting! that exhale
In single breath your odours manifold!
Breathe now; and let the hunger be appeas'd,
That with great craving long hath held my soul,
Finding no food on earth.  This well I know,
That if there be in heav'n a realm, that shows
In faithful mirror the celestial Justice,
Yours without veil reflects it.  Ye discern
The heed, wherewith I do prepare myself
To hearken; ye the doubt that urges me
With such inveterate craving."  Straight I saw,
Like to a falcon issuing from the hood,
That rears his head, and claps him with his wings,
His beauty and his eagerness bewraying.
So saw I move that stately sign, with praise
Of grace divine inwoven and high song
Of inexpressive joy.  "He," it began,
"Who turn'd his compass on the world's extreme,
And in that space so variously hath wrought,
Both openly, and in secret, in such wise
Could not through all the universe display
Impression of his glory, that the Word
Of his omniscience should not still remain
In infinite excess.  In proof whereof,
He first through pride supplanted, who was sum
Of each created being, waited not
For light celestial, and abortive fell.
Whence needs each lesser nature is but scant
Receptacle unto that Good, which knows
No limit, measur'd by itself alone.
Therefore your sight, of th' omnipresent Mind
A single beam, its origin must own
Surpassing far its utmost potency.
The ken, your world is gifted with, descends
In th' everlasting Justice as low down,
As eye doth in the sea; which though it mark
The bottom from the shore, in the wide main
Discerns it not; and ne'ertheless it is,
But hidden through its deepness.  Light is none,
Save that which cometh from the pure serene
Of ne'er disturbed ether: for the rest,
'Tis darkness all, or shadow of the flesh,
Or else its poison.  Here confess reveal'd
That covert, which hath hidden from thy search
The living justice, of the which thou mad'st
Such frequent question; for thou saidst--'A man
Is born on Indus' banks, and none is there
Who speaks of Christ, nor who doth read nor write,
And all his inclinations and his acts,
As far as human reason sees, are good,
And he offendeth not in word or deed.
But unbaptiz'd he dies, and void of faith.
Where is the justice that condemns him?  where
His blame, if he believeth not?'--What then,
And who art thou, that on the stool wouldst sit
To judge at distance of a thousand miles
With the short-sighted vision of a span?
To him, who subtilizes thus with me,
There would assuredly be room for doubt
Even to wonder, did not the safe word
Of scripture hold supreme authority.

"O animals of clay!  O spirits gross I
The primal will, that in itself is good,
Hath from itself, the chief Good, ne'er been mov'd.
Justice consists in consonance with it,
Derivable by no created good,
Whose very cause depends upon its beam."

As on her nest the stork, that turns about
Unto her young, whom lately she hath fed,
While they with upward eyes do look on her;
So lifted I my gaze; and bending so
The ever-blessed image wav'd its wings,
Lab'ring with such deep counsel.  Wheeling round
It warbled, and did say: "As are my notes
To thee, who understand'st them not, such is
Th' eternal judgment unto mortal ken."

Then still abiding in that ensign rang'd,
Wherewith the Romans over-awed the world,
Those burning splendours of the Holy Spirit
Took up the strain; and thus it spake again:
"None ever hath ascended to this realm,
Who hath not a believer been in Christ,
Either before or after the blest limbs
Were nail'd upon the wood.  But lo! of those
Who call 'Christ, Christ,' there shall be many found,
 In judgment, further off from him by far,
Than such, to whom his name was never known.
Christians like these the Ethiop shall condemn:
When that the two assemblages shall part;
One rich eternally, the other poor.

"What may the Persians say unto your kings,
When they shall see that volume, in the which
All their dispraise is written, spread to view?
There amidst Albert's works shall that be read,
Which will give speedy motion to the pen,
When Prague shall mourn her desolated realm.
There shall be read the woe, that he doth work
With his adulterate money on the Seine,
Who by the tusk will perish: there be read
The thirsting pride, that maketh fool alike
The English and Scot, impatient of their bound.
There shall be seen the Spaniard's luxury,
The delicate living there of the Bohemian,
Who still to worth has been a willing stranger.
The halter of Jerusalem shall see
A unit for his virtue, for his vices
No less a mark than million.  He, who guards
The isle of fire by old Anchises honour'd
Shall find his avarice there and cowardice;
And better to denote his littleness,
The writing must be letters maim'd, that speak
Much in a narrow space.  All there shall know
His uncle and his brother's filthy doings,
Who so renown'd a nation and two crowns
Have bastardized.  And they, of Portugal
And Norway, there shall be expos'd with him
Of Ratza, who hath counterfeited ill
The coin of Venice.  O blest Hungary!
If thou no longer patiently abid'st
Thy ill-entreating! and, O blest Navarre!
If with thy mountainous girdle thou wouldst arm thee
In earnest of that day, e'en now are heard
Wailings and groans in Famagosta's streets
And Nicosia's, grudging at their beast,
Who keepeth even footing with the rest."






When, disappearing, from our hemisphere,
The world's enlightener vanishes, and day
On all sides wasteth, suddenly the sky,
Erewhile irradiate only with his beam,
Is yet again unfolded, putting forth
Innumerable lights wherein one shines.
Of such vicissitude in heaven I thought,
As the great sign, that marshaleth the world
And the world's leaders, in the blessed beak
Was silent; for that all those living lights,
Waxing in splendour, burst forth into songs,
Such as from memory glide and fall away.

Sweet love! that dost apparel thee in smiles,
How lustrous was thy semblance in those sparkles,
Which merely are from holy thoughts inspir'd!

After the precious and bright beaming stones,
That did ingem the sixth light, ceas'd the chiming
Of their angelic bells; methought I heard
The murmuring of a river, that doth fall
From rock to rock transpicuous, making known
The richness of his spring-head: and as sound
Of cistern, at the fret-board, or of pipe,
Is, at the wind-hole, modulate and tun'd;
Thus up the neck, as it were hollow, rose
That murmuring of the eagle, and forthwith
Voice there assum'd, and thence along the beak
Issued in form of words, such as my heart
Did look for, on whose tables I inscrib'd them.

"The part in me, that sees, and bears the sun,,
In mortal eagles," it began, "must now
Be noted steadfastly: for of the fires,
That figure me, those, glittering in mine eye,
Are chief of all the greatest.  This, that shines
Midmost for pupil, was the same, who sang
The Holy Spirit's song, and bare about
The ark from town to town; now doth he know
The merit of his soul-impassion'd strains
By their well-fitted guerdon.  Of the five,
That make the circle of the vision, he
Who to the beak is nearest, comforted
The widow for her son: now doth he know
How dear he costeth not to follow Christ,
Both from experience of this pleasant life,
And of its opposite.  He next, who follows
In the circumference, for the over arch,
By true repenting slack'd the pace of death:
Now knoweth he, that the degrees of heav'n
Alter not, when through pious prayer below
Today's is made tomorrow's destiny.
The other following, with the laws and me,
To yield the shepherd room, pass'd o'er to Greece,
From good intent producing evil fruit:
Now knoweth he, how all the ill, deriv'd
From his well doing, doth not helm him aught,
Though it have brought destruction on the world.
That, which thou seest in the under bow,
Was William, whom that land bewails, which weeps
For Charles and Frederick living: now he knows
How well is lov'd in heav'n the righteous king,
Which he betokens by his radiant seeming.
Who in the erring world beneath would deem,
That Trojan Ripheus in this round was set
Fifth of the saintly splendours?  now he knows
Enough of that, which the world cannot see,
The grace divine, albeit e'en his sight
Reach not its utmost depth."  Like to the lark,
That warbling in the air expatiates long,
Then, trilling out his last sweet melody,
Drops satiate with the sweetness; such appear'd
That image stampt by the' everlasting pleasure,
Which fashions like itself all lovely things.

I, though my doubting were as manifest,
As is through glass the hue that mantles it,
In silence waited not: for to my lips
"What things are these?"  involuntary rush'd,
And forc'd a passage out: whereat I mark'd
A sudden lightening and new revelry.
The eye was kindled: and the blessed sign
No more to keep me wond'ring and suspense,
Replied: "I see that thou believ'st these things,
Because I tell them, but discern'st not how;
So that thy knowledge waits not on thy faith:
As one who knows the name of thing by rote,
But is a stranger to its properties,
Till other's tongue reveal them.  Fervent love
And lively hope with violence assail
The kingdom of the heavens, and overcome
The will of the Most high; not in such sort
As man prevails o'er man; but conquers it,
Because 't is willing to be conquer'd, still,
Though conquer'd, by its mercy conquering.

"Those, in the eye who live the first and fifth,
Cause thee to marvel, in that thou behold'st
The region of the angels deck'd with them.
They quitted not their bodies, as thou deem'st,
Gentiles but Christians, in firm rooted faith,
This of the feet in future to be pierc'd,
That of feet nail'd already to the cross.
One from the barrier of the dark abyss,
Where never any with good will returns,
Came back unto his bones.  Of lively hope
Such was the meed; of lively hope, that wing'd
The prayers sent up to God for his release,
And put power into them to bend his will.
The glorious Spirit, of whom I speak to thee,
A little while returning to the flesh,
Believ'd in him, who had the means to help,
And, in believing, nourish'd such a flame
Of holy love, that at the second death
He was made sharer in our gamesome mirth.
The other, through the riches of that grace,
Which from so deep a fountain doth distil,
As never eye created saw its rising,
Plac'd all his love below on just and right:
Wherefore of grace God op'd in him the eye
To the redemption of mankind to come;
Wherein believing, he endur'd no more
The filth of paganism, and for their ways
Rebuk'd the stubborn nations.  The three nymphs,
Whom at the right wheel thou beheldst advancing,
Were sponsors for him more than thousand years
Before baptizing.  O how far remov'd,
Predestination! is thy root from such
As see not the First cause entire: and ye,
O mortal men! be wary how ye judge:
For we, who see our Maker, know not yet
The number of the chosen: and esteem
Such scantiness of knowledge our delight:
For all our good is in that primal good
Concentrate, and God's will and ours are one."

So, by that form divine, was giv'n to me
Sweet medicine to clear and strengthen sight,
And, as one handling skillfully the harp,
Attendant on some skilful songster's voice
Bids the chords vibrate, and therein the song
Acquires more pleasure; so, the whilst it spake,
It doth remember me, that I beheld
The pair of blessed luminaries move.
Like the accordant twinkling of two eyes,
Their beamy circlets, dancing to the sounds.






Again mine eyes were fix'd on Beatrice,
And with mine eyes my soul, that in her looks
Found all contentment.  Yet no smile she wore
And, "Did I smile," quoth she, "thou wouldst be straight
Like Semele when into ashes turn'd:
For, mounting these eternal palace-stairs,
My beauty, which the loftier it climbs,
As thou hast noted, still doth kindle more,
So shines, that, were no temp'ring interpos'd,
Thy mortal puissance would from its rays
Shrink, as the leaf doth from the thunderbolt.
Into the seventh splendour are we wafted,
That underneath the burning lion's breast
Beams, in this hour, commingled with his might,
Thy mind be with thine eyes: and in them mirror'd
The shape, which in this mirror shall be shown."
Whoso can deem, how fondly I had fed
My sight upon her blissful countenance,
May know, when to new thoughts I chang'd, what joy
To do the bidding of my heav'nly guide:
In equal balance poising either weight.

Within the crystal, which records the name,
(As its remoter circle girds the world)
Of that lov'd monarch, in whose happy reign
No ill had power to harm, I saw rear'd up,
In colour like to sun-illumin'd gold.

A ladder, which my ken pursued in vain,
So lofty was the summit; down whose steps
I saw the splendours in such multitude
Descending, ev'ry light in heav'n, methought,
Was shed thence.  As the rooks, at dawn of day
Bestirring them to dry their feathers chill,
Some speed their way a-field, and homeward some,
Returning, cross their flight, while some abide
And wheel around their airy lodge; so seem'd
That glitterance, wafted on alternate wing,
As upon certain stair it met, and clash'd
Its shining. And one ling'ring near us, wax'd
So bright, that in my thought: said: "The love,
Which this betokens me, admits no doubt."

Unwillingly from question I refrain,
To her, by whom my silence and my speech
Are order'd, looking for a sign: whence she,
Who in the sight of Him, that seeth all,
Saw wherefore I was silent, prompted me
T' indulge the fervent wish; and I began:
"I am not worthy, of my own desert,
That thou shouldst answer me; but for her sake,
Who hath vouchsaf'd my asking, spirit blest!
That in thy joy art shrouded! say the cause,
Which bringeth thee so near: and wherefore, say,
Doth the sweet symphony of Paradise
Keep silence here, pervading with such sounds
Of rapt devotion ev'ry lower sphere?"
"Mortal art thou in hearing as in sight;"
Was the reply: "and what forbade the smile
Of Beatrice interrupts our song.
Only to yield thee gladness of my voice,
And of the light that vests me, I thus far
Descend these hallow'd steps: not that more love
Invites me; for lo! there aloft, as much
Or more of love is witness'd in those flames:
But such my lot by charity assign'd,
That makes us ready servants, as thou seest,
To execute the counsel of the Highest."
"That in this court," said I, "O sacred lamp!
Love no compulsion needs, but follows free
Th' eternal Providence, I well discern:
This harder find to deem, why of thy peers
Thou only to this office wert foredoom'd."
I had not ended, when, like rapid mill,
Upon its centre whirl'd the light; and then
The love, that did inhabit there, replied:
"Splendour eternal, piercing through these folds,
Its virtue to my vision knits, and thus
Supported, lifts me so above myself,
That on the sov'ran essence, which it wells from,
I have the power to gaze: and hence the joy,
Wherewith I sparkle, equaling with my blaze
The keenness of my sight.  But not the soul,
That is in heav'n most lustrous, nor the seraph
That hath his eyes most fix'd on God, shall solve
What thou hast ask'd: for in th' abyss it lies
Of th' everlasting statute sunk so low,
That no created ken may fathom it.
And, to the mortal world when thou return'st,
Be this reported; that none henceforth dare
Direct his footsteps to so dread a bourn.
The mind, that here is radiant, on the earth
Is wrapt in mist.  Look then if she may do,
Below, what passeth her ability,
When she is ta'en to heav'n."  By words like these
Admonish'd, I the question urg'd no more;
And of the spirit humbly sued alone
T' instruct me of its state.  "'Twixt either shore
Of Italy, nor distant from thy land,
A stony ridge ariseth, in such sort,
The thunder doth not lift his voice so high,
They call it Catria: at whose foot a cell
Is sacred to the lonely Eremite,
For worship set apart and holy rites."
A third time thus it spake; then added: "There
So firmly to God's service I adher'd,
That with no costlier viands than the juice
Of olives, easily I pass'd the heats
Of summer and the winter frosts, content
In heav'n-ward musings.  Rich were the returns
And fertile, which that cloister once was us'd
To render to these heavens: now 't is fall'n
Into a waste so empty, that ere long
Detection must lay bare its vanity
Pietro Damiano there was I yclept:
Pietro the sinner, when before I dwelt
Beside the Adriatic, in the house
Of our blest Lady.  Near upon my close
Of mortal life, through much importuning
I was constrain'd to wear the hat that still
From bad to worse it shifted.--Cephas came;
He came, who was the Holy Spirit's vessel,
Barefoot and lean, eating their bread, as chanc'd,
At the first table.  Modern Shepherd's need
Those who on either hand may prop and lead them,
So burly are they grown: and from behind
Others to hoist them.  Down the palfrey's sides
Spread their broad mantles, so as both the beasts
Are cover'd with one skin.  O patience! thou
That lookst on this and doth endure so long."
I at those accents saw the splendours down
From step to step alight, and wheel, and wax,
Each circuiting, more beautiful.  Round this
They came, and stay'd them; uttered them a shout
So loud, it hath no likeness here: nor I
Wist what it spake, so deaf'ning was the thunder.






Astounded, to the guardian of my steps
I turn'd me, like the chill, who always runs
Thither for succour, where he trusteth most,
And she was like the mother, who her son
Beholding pale and breathless, with her voice
Soothes him, and he is cheer'd; for thus she spake,
Soothing me: "Know'st not thou, thou art in heav'n?
And know'st not thou, whatever is in heav'n,
Is holy, and that nothing there is done
But is done zealously and well?  Deem now,
What change in thee the song, and what my smile
had wrought, since thus the shout had pow'r to move thee.
In which couldst thou have understood their prayers,
The vengeance were already known to thee,
Which thou must witness ere thy mortal hour,
The sword of heav'n is not in haste to smite,
Nor yet doth linger, save unto his seeming,
Who in desire or fear doth look for it.
But elsewhere now l bid thee turn thy view;
So shalt thou many a famous spirit behold."
Mine eyes directing, as she will'd, I saw
A hundred little spheres, that fairer grew
By interchange of splendour.  I remain'd,
As one, who fearful of o'er-much presuming,
Abates in him the keenness of desire,
Nor dares to question, when amid those pearls,
One largest and most lustrous onward drew,
That it might yield contentment to my wish;
And from within it these the sounds I heard.

"If thou, like me, beheldst the charity
That burns amongst us, what thy mind conceives,
Were utter'd.  But that, ere the lofty bound
Thou reach, expectance may not weary thee,
I will make answer even to the thought,
Which thou hast such respect of.  In old days,
That mountain, at whose side Cassino rests,
Was on its height frequented by a race
Deceived and ill dispos'd: and I it was,
Who thither carried first the name of Him,
Who brought the soul-subliming truth to man.
And such a speeding grace shone over me,
That from their impious worship I reclaim'd
The dwellers round about, who with the world
Were in delusion lost.  These other flames,
The spirits of men contemplative, were all
Enliven'd by that warmth, whose kindly force
Gives birth to flowers and fruits of holiness.
Here is Macarius; Romoaldo here:
And here my brethren, who their steps refrain'd
Within the cloisters, and held firm their heart."

I answ'ring, thus; "Thy gentle words and kind,
And this the cheerful semblance, I behold
Not unobservant, beaming in ye all,
Have rais'd assurance in me, wakening it
Full-blossom'd in my bosom, as a rose
Before the sun, when the consummate flower
Has spread to utmost amplitude.  Of thee
Therefore entreat I, father! to declare
If I may gain such favour, as to gaze
Upon thine image, by no covering veil'd."

"Brother!"  he thus rejoin'd, "in the last sphere
Expect completion of thy lofty aim,
For there on each desire completion waits,
And there on mine: where every aim is found
Perfect, entire, and for fulfillment ripe.
There all things are as they have ever been:
For space is none to bound, nor pole divides,
Our ladder reaches even to that clime,
And so at giddy distance mocks thy view.
Thither the Patriarch Jacob saw it stretch
Its topmost round, when it appear'd to him
With angels laden.  But to mount it now
None lifts his foot from earth: and hence my rule
Is left a profitless stain upon the leaves;
The walls, for abbey rear'd, turned into dens,
The cowls to sacks choak'd up with musty meal.
Foul usury doth not more lift itself
Against God's pleasure, than that fruit which makes
The hearts of monks so wanton: for whate'er
Is in the church's keeping, all pertains.
To such, as sue for heav'n's sweet sake, and not
To those who in respect of kindred claim,
Or on more vile allowance.  Mortal flesh
Is grown so dainty, good beginnings last not
From the oak's birth, unto the acorn's setting.
His convent Peter founded without gold
Or silver; I with pray'rs and fasting mine;
And Francis his in meek humility.
And if thou note the point, whence each proceeds,
Then look what it hath err'd to, thou shalt find
The white grown murky.  Jordan was turn'd back;
And a less wonder, then the refluent sea,
May at God's pleasure work amendment here."

So saying, to his assembly back he drew:
And they together cluster'd into one,
Then all roll'd upward like an eddying wind.

The sweet dame beckon'd me to follow them:
And, by that influence only, so prevail'd
Over my nature, that no natural motion,
Ascending or descending here below,
Had, as I mounted, with my pennon vied.

So, reader, as my hope is to return
Unto the holy triumph, for the which
I ofttimes wail my sins, and smite my breast,
Thou hadst been longer drawing out and thrusting
Thy finger in the fire, than I was, ere
The sign, that followeth Taurus, I beheld,
And enter'd its precinct.  O glorious stars!
O light impregnate with exceeding virtue!
To whom whate'er of genius lifteth me
Above the vulgar, grateful I refer;
With ye the parent of all mortal life
Arose and set, when I did first inhale
The Tuscan air; and afterward, when grace
Vouchsaf'd me entrance to the lofty wheel
That in its orb impels ye, fate decreed
My passage at your clime.  To you my soul
Devoutly sighs, for virtue even now
To meet the hard emprize that draws me on.

"Thou art so near the sum of blessedness,"
Said Beatrice, "that behooves thy ken
Be vigilant and clear.  And, to this end,
Or even thou advance thee further, hence
Look downward, and contemplate, what a world
Already stretched under our feet there lies:
So as thy heart may, in its blithest mood,
Present itself to the triumphal throng,
Which through the' etherial concave comes rejoicing."

I straight obey'd; and with mine eye return'd
Through all the seven spheres, and saw this globe
So pitiful of semblance, that perforce
It moved my smiles: and him in truth I hold
For wisest, who esteems it least: whose thoughts
Elsewhere are fix'd, him worthiest call and best.
I saw the daughter of Latona shine
Without the shadow, whereof late I deem'd
That dense and rare were cause.  Here I sustain'd
The visage, Hyperion! of thy sun;
And mark'd, how near him with their circle, round
Move Maia and Dione; here discern'd
Jove's tempering 'twixt his sire and son; and hence
Their changes and their various aspects
Distinctly scann'd.  Nor might I not descry
Of all the seven, how bulky each, how swift;
Nor of their several distances not learn.
This petty area (o'er the which we stride
So fiercely), as along the eternal twins
I wound my way, appear'd before me all,
Forth from the havens stretch'd unto the hills.
Then to the beauteous eyes mine eyes return'd.






E'en as the bird, who midst the leafy bower
Has, in her nest, sat darkling through the night,
With her sweet brood, impatient to descry
Their wished looks, and to bring home their food,
In the fond quest unconscious of her toil:
She, of the time prevenient, on the spray,
That overhangs their couch, with wakeful gaze
Expects the sun; nor ever, till the dawn,
Removeth from the east her eager ken;
So stood the dame erect, and bent her glance
Wistfully on that region, where the sun
Abateth most his speed; that, seeing her
Suspense and wand'ring, I became as one,
In whom desire is waken'd, and the hope
Of somewhat new to come fills with delight.

Short space ensued; I was not held, I say,
Long in expectance, when I saw the heav'n
Wax more and more resplendent; and, "Behold,"
Cried Beatrice, "the triumphal hosts
Of Christ, and all the harvest reap'd at length
Of thy ascending up these spheres."  Meseem'd,
That, while she spake her image all did burn,
And in her eyes such fullness was of joy,
And I am fain to pass unconstrued by.

As in the calm full moon, when Trivia smiles,
In peerless beauty, 'mid th' eternal nympus,
That paint through all its gulfs the blue profound
In bright pre-eminence so saw I there,
O'er million lamps a sun, from whom all drew
Their radiance as from ours the starry train:
And through the living light so lustrous glow'd
The substance, that my ken endur'd it not.

O Beatrice! sweet and precious guide!
Who cheer'd me with her comfortable words!
"Against the virtue, that o'erpow'reth thee,
Avails not to resist.  Here is the might,
And here the wisdom, which did open lay
The path, that had been yearned for so long,
Betwixt the heav'n and earth."  Like to the fire,
That, in a cloud imprison'd doth break out
Expansive, so that from its womb enlarg'd,
It falleth against nature to the ground;
Thus in that heav'nly banqueting my soul
Outgrew herself; and, in the transport lost.
Holds now remembrance none of what she was.

"Ope thou thine eyes, and mark me: thou hast seen
Things, that empower thee to sustain my smile."

I was as one, when a forgotten dream
Doth come across him, and he strives in vain
To shape it in his fantasy again,
Whenas that gracious boon was proffer'd me,
Which never may be cancel'd from the book,
Wherein the past is written.  Now were all
Those tongues to sound, that have on sweetest milk
Of Polyhymnia and her sisters fed
And fatten'd, not with all their help to boot,
Unto the thousandth parcel of the truth,
My song might shadow forth that saintly smile,
flow merely in her saintly looks it wrought.
And with such figuring of Paradise
The sacred strain must leap, like one, that meets
A sudden interruption to his road.
But he, who thinks how ponderous the theme,
And that 't is lain upon a mortal shoulder,
May pardon, if it tremble with the burden.
The track, our ventrous keel must furrow, brooks
No unribb'd pinnace, no self-sparing pilot.

"Why doth my face," said Beatrice, "thus
Enamour thee, as that thou dost not turn
Unto the beautiful garden, blossoming
Beneath the rays of Christ?  Here is the rose,
Wherein the word divine was made incarnate;
And here the lilies, by whose odour known
The way of life was follow'd."  Prompt I heard
Her bidding, and encounter once again
The strife of aching vision.  As erewhile,
Through glance of sunlight, stream'd through broken cloud,
Mine eyes a flower-besprinkled mead have seen,
Though veil'd themselves in shade; so saw I there
Legions of splendours, on whom burning rays
Shed lightnings from above, yet saw I not
The fountain whence they flow'd.  O gracious virtue!
Thou, whose broad stamp is on them, higher up
Thou didst exalt thy glory to give room
To my o'erlabour'd sight: when at the name
Of that fair flower, whom duly I invoke
Both morn and eve, my soul, with all her might
Collected, on the goodliest ardour fix'd.
And, as the bright dimensions of the star
In heav'n excelling, as once here on earth
Were, in my eyeballs lively portray'd,
Lo! from within the sky a cresset fell,
Circling in fashion of a diadem,
And girt the star, and hov'ring round it wheel'd.

Whatever melody sounds sweetest here,
And draws the spirit most unto itself,
Might seem a rent cloud when it grates the thunder,
Compar'd unto the sounding of that lyre,
Wherewith the goodliest sapphire, that inlays
The floor of heav'n, was crown'd. "Angelic Love
I am, who thus with hov'ring flight enwheel
The lofty rapture from that womb inspir'd,
Where our desire did dwell: and round thee so,
Lady of Heav'n! will hover; long as thou
Thy Son shalt follow, and diviner joy
Shall from thy presence gild the highest sphere."

Such close was to the circling melody:
And, as it ended, all the other lights
Took up the strain, and echoed Mary's name.

The robe, that with its regal folds enwraps
The world, and with the nearer breath of God
Doth burn and quiver, held so far retir'd
Its inner hem and skirting over us,
That yet no glimmer of its majesty
Had stream'd unto me: therefore were mine eyes
Unequal to pursue the crowned flame,
That rose and sought its natal seed of fire;
And like to babe, that stretches forth its arms
For very eagerness towards the breast,
After the milk is taken; so outstretch'd
Their wavy summits all the fervent band,
Through zealous love to Mary: then in view
There halted, and "Regina Coeli" sang
So sweetly, the delight hath left me never.

O what o'erflowing plenty is up-pil'd
In those rich-laden coffers, which below
Sow'd the good seed, whose harvest now they keep.

Here are the treasures tasted, that with tears
Were in the Babylonian exile won,
When gold had fail'd them.  Here in synod high
Of ancient council with the new conven'd,
Under the Son of Mary and of God,
Victorious he his mighty triumph holds,
To whom the keys of glory were assign'd.






"O ye! in chosen fellowship advanc'd
To the great supper of the blessed Lamb,
Whereon who feeds hath every wish fulfill'd!
If to this man through God's grace be vouchsaf'd
Foretaste of that, which from your table falls,
Or ever death his fated term prescribe;
Be ye not heedless of his urgent will;
But may some influence of your sacred dews
Sprinkle him.  Of the fount ye alway drink,
Whence flows what most he craves."  Beatrice spake,
And the rejoicing spirits, like to spheres
On firm-set poles revolving, trail'd a blaze
Of comet splendour; and as wheels, that wind
Their circles in the horologe, so work
The stated rounds, that to th' observant eye
The first seems still, and, as it flew, the last;
E'en thus their carols weaving variously,
They by the measure pac'd, or swift, or slow,
Made me to rate the riches of their joy.

From that, which I did note in beauty most
Excelling, saw I issue forth a flame
So bright, as none was left more goodly there.
Round Beatrice thrice it wheel'd about,
With so divine a song, that fancy's ear
Records it not; and the pen passeth on
And leaves a blank: for that our mortal speech,
Nor e'en the inward shaping of the brain,
Hath colours fine enough to trace such folds.

"O saintly sister mine! thy prayer devout
Is with so vehement affection urg'd,
Thou dost unbind me from that beauteous sphere."

Such were the accents towards my lady breath'd
From that blest ardour, soon as it was stay'd:
To whom she thus: "O everlasting light
Of him, within whose mighty grasp our Lord
Did leave the keys, which of this wondrous bliss
He bare below! tent this man, as thou wilt,
With lighter probe or deep, touching the faith,
By the which thou didst on the billows walk.
If he in love, in hope, and in belief,
Be steadfast, is not hid from thee: for thou
Hast there thy ken, where all things are beheld
In liveliest portraiture.  But since true faith
Has peopled this fair realm with citizens,
Meet is, that to exalt its glory more,
Thou in his audience shouldst thereof discourse."

Like to the bachelor, who arms himself,
And speaks not, till the master have propos'd
The question, to approve, and not to end it;
So I, in silence, arm'd me, while she spake,
Summoning up each argument to aid;
As was behooveful for such questioner,
And such profession: "As good Christian ought,
Declare thee, What is faith?"  Whereat I rais'd
My forehead to the light, whence this had breath'd,
Then turn'd to Beatrice, and in her looks
Approval met, that from their inmost fount
I should unlock the waters.  "May the grace,
That giveth me the captain of the church
For confessor," said I, "vouchsafe to me
Apt utterance for my thoughts!" then added: "Sire!
E'en as set down by the unerring style
Of thy dear brother, who with thee conspir'd
To bring Rome in unto the way of life,
Faith of things hop'd is substance, and the proof
Of things not seen; and herein doth consist
Methinks its essence,"--"Rightly hast thou deem'd,"
Was answer'd: "if thou well discern, why first
He hath defin'd it, substance, and then proof."

"The deep things," I replied, "which here I scan
Distinctly, are below from mortal eye
So hidden, they have in belief alone
Their being, on which credence hope sublime
Is built; and therefore substance it intends.
And inasmuch as we must needs infer
From such belief our reasoning, all respect
To other view excluded, hence of proof
Th' intention is deriv'd."  Forthwith I heard:
"If thus, whate'er by learning men attain,
Were understood, the sophist would want room
To exercise his wit."  So breath'd the flame
Of love: then added: "Current is the coin
Thou utter'st, both in weight and in alloy.
But tell me, if thou hast it in thy purse."

"Even so glittering and so round," said I,
"I not a whit misdoubt of its assay."

Next issued from the deep imbosom'd splendour:
"Say, whence the costly jewel, on the which
Is founded every virtue, came to thee."
"The flood," I answer'd, "from the Spirit of God
Rain'd down upon the ancient bond and new,--
Here is the reas'ning, that convinceth me
So feelingly, each argument beside
Seems blunt and forceless in comparison."
Then heard I: "Wherefore holdest thou that each,
The elder proposition and the new,
Which so persuade thee, are the voice of heav'n?"

"The works, that follow'd, evidence their truth;"
I answer'd: "Nature did not make for these
The iron hot, or on her anvil mould them."
"Who voucheth to thee of the works themselves,"
Was the reply, "that they in very deed
Are that they purport?  None hath sworn so to thee."

"That all the world," said I, "should have been turn'd To Christian, and no miracle been wrought, Would in itself be such a miracle, The rest were not an hundredth part so great. E'en thou wentst forth in poverty and hunger To set the goodly plant, that from the vine, It once was, now is grown unsightly bramble." That ended, through the high celestial court Resounded all the spheres.  "Praise we one God!" In song of most unearthly melody. And when that Worthy thus, from branch to branch,
Examining, had led me, that we now
Approach'd the topmost bough, he straight resum'd;
"The grace, that holds sweet dalliance with thy soul,
So far discreetly hath thy lips unclos'd
That, whatsoe'er has past them, I commend.
Behooves thee to express, what thou believ'st,
The next, and whereon thy belief hath grown."

"O saintly sire and spirit!" I began,
"Who seest that, which thou didst so believe,
As to outstrip feet younger than thine own,
Toward the sepulchre?  thy will is here,
That I the tenour of my creed unfold;
And thou the cause of it hast likewise ask'd.
And I reply: I in one God believe,
One sole eternal Godhead, of whose love
All heav'n is mov'd, himself unmov'd the while.
Nor demonstration physical alone,
Or more intelligential and abstruse,
Persuades me to this faith; but from that truth
It cometh to me rather, which is shed
Through Moses, the rapt Prophets, and the Psalms.
The Gospel, and that ye yourselves did write,
When ye were gifted of the Holy Ghost.
In three eternal Persons I believe,
Essence threefold and one, mysterious league
Of union absolute, which, many a time,
The word of gospel lore upon my mind
Imprints: and from this germ, this firstling spark,
The lively flame dilates, and like heav'n's star
Doth glitter in me."  As the master hears,
Well pleas'd, and then enfoldeth in his arms
The servant, who hath joyful tidings brought,
And having told the errand keeps his peace;
Thus benediction uttering with song
Soon as my peace I held, compass'd me thrice
The apostolic radiance, whose behest
Had op'd lips; so well their answer pleas'd.






If e'er the sacred poem that hath made
Both heav'n and earth copartners in its toil,
And with lean abstinence, through many a year,
Faded my brow, be destin'd to prevail
Over the cruelty, which bars me forth
Of the fair sheep-fold, where a sleeping lamb
The wolves set on and fain had worried me,
With other voice and fleece of other grain
I shall forthwith return, and, standing up
At my baptismal font, shall claim the wreath
Due to the poet's temples: for I there
First enter'd on the faith which maketh souls
Acceptable to God: and, for its sake,
Peter had then circled my forehead thus.

Next from the squadron, whence had issued forth
The first fruit of Christ's vicars on the earth,
Toward us mov'd a light, at view whereof
My Lady, full of gladness, spake to me:
"Lo! lo! behold the peer of mickle might,
That makes Falicia throng'd with visitants!"

As when the ring-dove by his mate alights,
In circles each about the other wheels,
And murmuring cooes his fondness; thus saw I
One, of the other great and glorious prince,
With kindly greeting hail'd, extolling both
Their heavenly banqueting; but when an end
Was to their gratulation, silent, each,
Before me sat they down, so burning bright,
I could not look upon them.  Smiling then,
Beatrice spake: "O life in glory shrin'd!"
Who didst the largess of our kingly court
Set down with faithful pen! let now thy voice
Of hope the praises in this height resound.
For thou, who figur'st them in shapes, as clear,
As Jesus stood before thee, well can'st speak them."

"Lift up thy head, and be thou strong in trust:
For that, which hither from the mortal world
Arriveth, must be ripen'd in our beam."

Such cheering accents from the second flame
Assur'd me; and mine eyes I lifted up
Unto the mountains that had bow'd them late
With over-heavy burden.  "Sith our Liege
Wills of his grace that thou, or ere thy death,
In the most secret council, with his lords
Shouldst be confronted, so that having view'd
The glories of our court, thou mayst therewith
Thyself, and all who hear, invigorate
With hope, that leads to blissful end; declare,
What is that hope, how it doth flourish in thee,
And whence thou hadst it?"  Thus proceeding still,
The second light: and she, whose gentle love
My soaring pennons in that lofty flight
Escorted, thus preventing me, rejoin'd:
Among her sons, not one more full of hope,
Hath the church militant: so 't is of him
Recorded in the sun, whose liberal orb
Enlighteneth all our tribe: and ere his term
Of warfare, hence permitted he is come,
From Egypt to Jerusalem, to see.
The other points, both which thou hast inquir'd,
Not for more knowledge, but that he may tell
How dear thou holdst the virtue, these to him
Leave I; for he may answer thee with ease,
And without boasting, so God give him grace."
Like to the scholar, practis'd in his task,
Who, willing to give proof of diligence,
Seconds his teacher gladly, "Hope," said I,
"Is of the joy to come a sure expectance,
Th' effect of grace divine and merit preceding.
This light from many a star visits my heart,
But flow'd to me the first from him, who sang
The songs of the Supreme, himself supreme
Among his tuneful brethren.  'Let all hope
In thee,' so speak his anthem, 'who have known
Thy name;' and with my faith who know not that?
From thee, the next, distilling from his spring,
In thine epistle, fell on me the drops
So plenteously, that I on others shower
The influence of their dew."  Whileas I spake,
A lamping, as of quick and vollied lightning,
Within the bosom of that mighty sheen,
Play'd tremulous; then forth these accents breath'd:
"Love for the virtue which attended me
E'en to the palm, and issuing from the field,
Glows vigorous yet within me, and inspires
To ask of thee, whom also it delights;
What promise thou from hope in chief dost win."

"Both scriptures, new and ancient," I reply'd;
"Propose the mark (which even now I view)
For souls belov'd of God. Isaias saith,
That, in their own land, each one must be clad
In twofold vesture; and their proper lands this delicious life.
In terms more full,
And clearer far, thy brother hath set forth
This revelation to us, where he tells
Of the white raiment destin'd to the saints."
And, as the words were ending, from above,
"They hope in thee," first heard we cried: whereto
Answer'd the carols all.  Amidst them next,
A light of so clear amplitude emerg'd,
That winter's month were but a single day,
Were such a crystal in the Cancer's sign.

Like as a virgin riseth up, and goes,
And enters on the mazes of the dance,
Though gay, yet innocent of worse intent,
Than to do fitting honour to the bride;
So I beheld the new effulgence come
Unto the other two, who in a ring
Wheel'd, as became their rapture.  In the dance
And in the song it mingled.  And the dame
Held on them fix'd her looks: e'en as the spouse
Silent and moveless.  "This is he, who lay
Upon the bosom of our pelican:
This he, into whose keeping from the cross
The mighty charge was given."  Thus she spake,
Yet therefore naught the more remov'd her Sight
From marking them, or ere her words began,
Or when they clos'd.  As he, who looks intent,
And strives with searching ken, how he may see
The sun in his eclipse, and, through desire
Of seeing, loseth power of sight: so I
Peer'd on that last resplendence, while I heard:
"Why dazzlest thou thine eyes in seeking that,
Which here abides not?  Earth my body is,
In earth: and shall be, with the rest, so long,
As till our number equal the decree
Of the Most High.  The two that have ascended,
In this our blessed cloister, shine alone
With the two garments.  So report below."

As when, for ease of labour, or to shun
Suspected peril at a whistle's breath,
The oars, erewhile dash'd frequent in the wave,
All rest; the flamy circle at that voice
So rested, and the mingling sound was still,
Which from the trinal band soft-breathing rose.
I turn'd, but ah! how trembled in my thought,
When, looking at my side again to see
Beatrice, I descried her not, although
Not distant, on the happy coast she stood.






With dazzled eyes, whilst wond'ring I remain'd,
Forth of the beamy flame which dazzled me,
Issued a breath, that in attention mute
Detain'd me; and these words it spake: "'T were well,
That, long as till thy vision, on my form
O'erspent, regain its virtue, with discourse
Thou compensate the brief delay.  Say then,
Beginning, to what point thy soul aspires:

"And meanwhile rest assur'd, that sight in thee
Is but o'erpowered a space, not wholly quench'd:
Since thy fair guide and lovely, in her look
Hath potency, the like to that which dwelt
In Ananias' hand." I answering thus:
"Be to mine eyes the remedy or late
Or early, at her pleasure; for they were
The gates, at which she enter'd, and did light
Her never dying fire.  My wishes here
Are centered; in this palace is the weal,
That Alpha and Omega, is to all
The lessons love can read me."  Yet again
The voice which had dispers'd my fear, when daz'd
With that excess, to converse urg'd, and spake:
"Behooves thee sift more narrowly thy terms,
And say, who level'd at this scope thy bow."

"Philosophy," said I, ''hath arguments,
And this place hath authority enough
'T' imprint in me such love: for, of constraint,
Good, inasmuch as we perceive the good,
Kindles our love, and in degree the more,
As it comprises more of goodness in 't.
The essence then, where such advantage is,
That each good, found without it, is naught else
But of his light the beam, must needs attract
The soul of each one, loving, who the truth
Discerns, on which this proof is built.  Such truth
Learn I from him, who shows me the first love
Of all intelligential substances
Eternal: from his voice I learn, whose word
Is truth, that of himself to Moses saith,
'I will make all my good before thee pass.'
Lastly from thee I learn, who chief proclaim'st,
E'en at the outset of thy heralding,
In mortal ears the mystery of heav'n."

"Through human wisdom, and th' authority
Therewith agreeing," heard I answer'd, "keep
The choicest of thy love for God.  But say,
If thou yet other cords within thee feel'st
That draw thee towards him; so that thou report
How many are the fangs, with which this love
Is grappled to thy soul."  I did not miss,
To what intent the eagle of our Lord
Had pointed his demand; yea noted well
Th' avowal, which he led to; and resum'd:
"All grappling bonds, that knit the heart to God,
Confederate to make fast our clarity.
The being of the world, and mine own being,
The death which he endur'd that I should live,
And that, which all the faithful hope, as I do,
To the foremention'd lively knowledge join'd,
Have from the sea of ill love sav'd my bark,
And on the coast secur'd it of the right.
As for the leaves, that in the garden bloom,
My love for them is great, as is the good
Dealt by th' eternal hand, that tends them all."

I ended, and therewith a song most sweet
Rang through the spheres; and "Holy, holy, holy,"
Accordant with the rest my lady sang.
And as a sleep is broken and dispers'd
Through sharp encounter of the nimble light,
With the eye's spirit running forth to meet
The ray, from membrane on to the membrane urg'd;
And the upstartled wight loathes that he sees;
So, at his sudden waking, he misdeems
Of all around him, till assurance waits
On better judgment: thus the saintly came
Drove from before mine eyes the motes away,
With the resplendence of her own, that cast
Their brightness downward, thousand miles below.
Whence I my vision, clearer shall before,
Recover'd; and, well nigh astounded, ask'd
Of a fourth light, that now with us I saw.

And Beatrice: "The first diving soul,
That ever the first virtue fram'd, admires
Within these rays his Maker."  Like the leaf,
That bows its lithe top till the blast is blown;
By its own virtue rear'd then stands aloof;
So I, the whilst she said, awe-stricken bow'd.
Then eagerness to speak embolden'd me;
And I began: "O fruit! that wast alone
Mature, when first engender'd!  Ancient father!
That doubly seest in every wedded bride
Thy daughter by affinity and blood!
Devoutly as I may, I pray thee hold
Converse with me: my will thou seest; and I,
More speedily to hear thee, tell it not."

It chanceth oft some animal bewrays,
Through the sleek cov'ring of his furry coat.
The fondness, that stirs in him and conforms
His outside seeming to the cheer within:
And in like guise was Adam's spirit mov'd
To joyous mood, that through the covering shone,
Transparent, when to pleasure me it spake:
"No need thy will be told, which I untold
Better discern, than thou whatever thing
Thou holdst most certain: for that will I see
In Him, who is truth's mirror, and Himself
Parhelion unto all things, and naught else
To him.  This wouldst thou hear; how long since God
Plac'd me high garden, from whose hounds
She led me up in this ladder, steep and long;
What space endur'd my season of delight;
Whence truly sprang the wrath that banish'd me;
And what the language, which I spake and fram'd
Not that I tasted of the tree, my son,
Was in itself the cause of that exile,
But only my transgressing of the mark
Assign'd me.  There, whence at thy lady's hest
The Mantuan mov'd him, still was I debarr'd
This council, till the sun had made complete,
Four thousand and three hundred rounds and twice,
His annual journey; and, through every light
In his broad pathway, saw I him return,
Thousand save sev'nty times, the whilst I dwelt
Upon the earth.  The language I did use
Was worn away, or ever Nimrod's race
Their unaccomplishable work began.
For naught, that man inclines to, ere was lasting,
Left by his reason free, and variable,
As is the sky that sways him.  That he speaks,
Is nature's prompting: whether thus or thus,
She leaves to you, as ye do most affect it.
Ere I descended into hell's abyss,
El was the name on earth of the Chief Good,
Whose joy enfolds me: Eli then 't was call'd
And so beseemeth: for, in mortals, use
Is as the leaf upon the bough; that goes,
And other comes instead.  Upon the mount
Most high above the waters, all my life,
Both innocent and guilty, did but reach
From the first hour, to that which cometh next
(As the sun changes quarter), to the sixth."






Then  "Glory to the Father, to the Son,
And to the Holy Spirit," rang aloud
Throughout all Paradise, that with the song
My spirit reel'd, so passing sweet the strain:
And what I saw was equal ecstasy;
One universal smile it seem'd of all things,
Joy past compare, gladness unutterable,
Imperishable life of peace and love,
Exhaustless riches and unmeasur'd bliss.

Before mine eyes stood the four torches lit;
And that, which first had come, began to wax
In brightness, and in semblance such became,
As Jove might be, if he and Mars were birds,
And interchang'd their plumes.  Silence ensued,
Through the blest quire, by Him, who here appoints
Vicissitude of ministry, enjoin'd;
When thus I heard: "Wonder not, if my hue
Be chang'd; for, while I speak, these shalt thou see
All in like manner change with me.  My place
He who usurps on earth (my place, ay, mine,
Which in the presence of the Son of God
Is void), the same hath made my cemetery
A common sewer of puddle and of blood:
The more below his triumph, who from hence
Malignant fell."  Such colour, as the sun,
At eve or morning, paints an adverse cloud,
Then saw I sprinkled over all the sky.
And as th' unblemish'd dame, who in herself
Secure of censure, yet at bare report
Of other's failing, shrinks with maiden fear;
So Beatrice in her semblance chang'd:
And such eclipse in heav'n methinks was seen,
When the Most Holy suffer'd.  Then the words
Proceeded, with voice, alter'd from itself
So clean, the semblance did not alter more.
"Not to this end was Christ's spouse with my blood,
With that of Linus, and of Cletus fed:
That she might serve for purchase of base gold:
But for the purchase of this happy life
Did Sextus, Pius, and Callixtus bleed,
And Urban, they, whose doom was not without
Much weeping seal'd.  No purpose was of our
That on the right hand of our successors
Part of the Christian people should be set,
And part upon their left; nor that the keys,
Which were vouchsaf'd me, should for ensign serve
Unto the banners, that do levy war
On the baptiz'd: nor I, for sigil-mark
Set upon sold and lying privileges;
Which makes me oft to bicker and turn red.
In shepherd's clothing greedy wolves below
Range wide o'er all the pastures.  Arm of God!
Why longer sleepst thou?  Caorsines and Gascona
Prepare to quaff our blood.  O good beginning
To what a vile conclusion must thou stoop!
But the high providence, which did defend
Through Scipio the world's glory unto Rome,
Will not delay its succour: and thou, son,
Who through thy mortal weight shall yet again
Return below, open thy lips, nor hide
What is by me not hidden."  As a Hood
Of frozen vapours streams adown the air,
What time the she-goat with her skiey horn
Touches the sun; so saw I there stream wide
The vapours, who with us had linger'd late
And with glad triumph deck th' ethereal cope.
Onward my sight their semblances pursued;
So far pursued, as till the space between
From its reach sever'd them: whereat the guide
Celestial, marking me no more intent
On upward gazing, said, "Look down and see
What circuit thou hast compass'd."  From the hour
When I before had cast my view beneath,
All the first region overpast I saw,
Which from the midmost to the bound'ry winds;
That onward thence from Gades I beheld
The unwise passage of Laertes' son,
And hitherward the shore, where thou, Europa!
Mad'st thee a joyful burden: and yet more
Of this dim spot had seen, but that the sun,
A constellation off and more, had ta'en
His progress in the zodiac underneath.

Then by the spirit, that doth never leave
Its amorous dalliance with my lady's looks,
Back with redoubled ardour were mine eyes
Led unto her: and from her radiant smiles,
Whenas I turn'd me, pleasure so divine
Did lighten on me, that whatever bait
Or art or nature in the human flesh,
Or in its limn'd resemblance, can combine
Through greedy eyes to take the soul withal,
Were to her beauty nothing.  Its boon influence
From the fair nest of Leda rapt me forth,
And wafted on into the swiftest heav'n.

What place for entrance Beatrice chose,
I may not say, so uniform was all,
Liveliest and loftiest.  She my secret wish
Divin'd; and with such gladness, that God's love
Seem'd from her visage shining, thus began:
"Here is the goal, whence motion on his race
Starts; motionless the centre, and the rest
All mov'd around.  Except the soul divine,
Place in this heav'n is none, the soul divine,
Wherein the love, which ruleth o'er its orb,
Is kindled, and the virtue that it sheds;
One circle, light and love, enclasping it,
As this doth clasp the others; and to Him,
Who draws the bound, its limit only known.
Measur'd itself by none, it doth divide
Motion to all, counted unto them forth,
As by the fifth or half ye count forth ten.
The vase, wherein time's roots are plung'd, thou seest,
Look elsewhere for the leaves.  O mortal lust!
That canst not lift thy head above the waves
Which whelm and sink thee down!  The will in man
Bears goodly blossoms; but its ruddy promise
Is, by the dripping of perpetual rain,
Made mere abortion: faith and innocence
Are met with but in babes, each taking leave
Ere cheeks with down are sprinkled; he, that fasts,
While yet a stammerer, with his tongue let loose
Gluts every food alike in every moon.
One yet a babbler, loves and listens to
His mother; but no sooner hath free use
Of speech, than he doth wish her in her grave.
So suddenly doth the fair child of him,
Whose welcome is the morn and eve his parting,
To negro blackness change her virgin white.

"Thou, to abate thy wonder, note that none
Bears rule in earth, and its frail family
Are therefore wand'rers.  Yet before the date,
When through the hundredth in his reck'ning drops
Pale January must be shor'd aside
From winter's calendar, these heav'nly spheres
Shall roar so loud, that fortune shall be fain
To turn the poop, where she hath now the prow;
So that the fleet run onward; and true fruit,
Expected long, shall crown at last the bloom!"






So she who doth imparadise my soul,
Had drawn the veil from off our pleasant life,
And bar'd the truth of poor mortality;
When lo! as one who, in a mirror, spies
The shining of a flambeau at his back,
Lit sudden ore he deem of its approach,
And turneth to resolve him, if the glass
Have told him true, and sees the record faithful
As note is to its metre; even thus,
I well remember, did befall to me,
Looking upon the beauteous eyes, whence love
Had made the leash to take me.  As I turn'd;
And that, which, in their circles, none who spies,
Can miss of, in itself apparent, struck
On mine; a point I saw, that darted light
So sharp, no lid, unclosing, may bear up
Against its keenness.  The least star we view
From hence, had seem'd a moon, set by its side,
As star by side of star.  And so far off,
Perchance, as is the halo from the light
Which paints it, when most dense the vapour spreads,
There wheel'd about the point a circle of fire,
More rapid than the motion, which first girds
The world.  Then, circle after circle, round
Enring'd each other; till the seventh reach'd
Circumference so ample, that its bow,
Within the span of Juno's messenger,
lied scarce been held entire. Beyond the sev'nth,
Follow'd yet other two.  And every one,
As more in number distant from the first,
Was tardier in motion; and that glow'd
With flame most pure, that to the sparkle' of truth
Was nearest, as partaking most, methinks,
Of its reality.  The guide belov'd
Saw me in anxious thought suspense, and spake:
"Heav'n, and all nature, hangs upon that point.
The circle thereto most conjoin'd observe;
And know, that by intenser love its course
Is to this swiftness wing'd."  To whom I thus:
"It were enough; nor should I further seek,
Had I but witness'd order, in the world
Appointed, such as in these wheels is seen.
But in the sensible world such diff'rence is,
That is each round shows more divinity,
As each is wider from the centre.  Hence,
If in this wondrous and angelic temple,
That hath for confine only light and love,
My wish may have completion I must know,
Wherefore such disagreement is between
Th' exemplar and its copy: for myself,
Contemplating, I fail to pierce the cause."

"It is no marvel, if thy fingers foil'd
Do leave the knot untied: so hard 't is grown
For want of tenting."  Thus she said: "But take,"
She added, "if thou wish thy cure, my words,
And entertain them subtly.  Every orb
Corporeal, doth proportion its extent
Unto the virtue through its parts diffus'd.
The greater blessedness preserves the more.
The greater is the body (if all parts
Share equally) the more is to preserve.
Therefore the circle, whose swift course enwheels
The universal frame answers to that,
Which is supreme in knowledge and in love
Thus by the virtue, not the seeming, breadth
Of substance, measure, thou shalt see the heav'ns,
Each to the' intelligence that ruleth it,
Greater to more, and smaller unto less,
Suited in strict and wondrous harmony."

As when the sturdy north blows from his cheek
A blast, that scours the sky, forthwith our air,
Clear'd of the rack, that hung on it before,
Glitters; and, With his beauties all unveil'd,
The firmament looks forth serene, and smiles;
Such was my cheer, when Beatrice drove
With clear reply the shadows back, and truth
Was manifested, as a star in heaven.
And when the words were ended, not unlike
To iron in the furnace, every cirque
Ebullient shot forth scintillating fires:
And every sparkle shivering to new blaze,
In number did outmillion the account
Reduplicate upon the chequer'd board.
Then heard I echoing on from choir to choir,
"Hosanna," to the fixed point, that holds,
And shall for ever hold them to their place,
From everlasting, irremovable.

Musing awhile I stood: and she, who saw
by inward meditations, thus began:
"In the first circles, they, whom thou beheldst,
Are seraphim and cherubim.  Thus swift
Follow their hoops, in likeness to the point,
Near as they can, approaching; and they can
The more, the loftier their vision.  Those,
That round them fleet, gazing the Godhead next,
Are thrones; in whom the first trine ends.  And all
Are blessed, even as their sight descends
Deeper into the truth, wherein rest is
For every mind.  Thus happiness hath root
In seeing, not in  loving, which of sight
Is aftergrowth.  And of the seeing such
The meed, as unto each in due degree
Grace and good-will their measure have assign'd.
The other trine, that with still opening buds
In this eternal springtide blossom fair,
Fearless of bruising from the nightly ram,
Breathe up in warbled melodies threefold
Hosannas blending ever, from the three
Transmitted. hierarchy of gods, for aye
Rejoicing, dominations first, next then
Virtues, and powers the third.  The next to whom
Are princedoms and archangels, with glad round
To tread their festal ring; and last the band
Angelical, disporting in their sphere.
All, as they circle in their orders, look
Aloft, and downward with such sway prevail,
That all with mutual impulse tend to God.
These once a mortal view beheld.  Desire
In Dionysius so intently wrought,
That he, as I have done rang'd them; and nam'd
Their orders, marshal'd in his thought.  From him
Dissentient, one refus'd his sacred read.
But soon as in this heav'n his doubting eyes
Were open'd, Gregory at his error smil'd
Nor marvel, that a denizen of earth
Should scan such secret truth; for he had learnt
Both this and much beside of these our orbs,
From an eye-witness to heav'n's mysteries."






No longer than what time Latona's twins
Cover'd of Libra and the fleecy star,
Together both, girding the' horizon hang,
In even balance from the zenith pois'd,
Till from that verge, each, changing hemisphere,
Part the nice level; e'en so brief a space
Did Beatrice's silence hold.  A smile
Bat painted on her cheek; and her fix'd gaze
Bent on the point, at which my vision fail'd:
When thus her words resuming she began:
"I speak, nor what thou wouldst inquire demand;
For I have mark'd it, where all time and place
Are present.  Not for increase to himself
Of good, which may not be increas'd, but forth
To manifest his glory by its beams,
Inhabiting his own eternity,
Beyond time's limit or what bound soe'er
To circumscribe his being, as he will'd,
Into new natures, like unto himself,
Eternal Love unfolded.  Nor before,
As if in dull inaction torpid lay.
For not in process of before or aft
Upon these waters mov'd the Spirit of God.
Simple and mix'd, both form and substance, forth
To perfect being started, like three darts
Shot from a bow three-corded.  And as ray
In crystal, glass, and amber, shines entire,
E'en at the moment of its issuing; thus
Did, from th' eternal Sovran, beam entire
His threefold operation, at one act
Produc'd coeval.  Yet in order each
Created his due station knew: those highest,
Who pure intelligence were made: mere power
The lowest: in the midst, bound with strict league,
Intelligence and power, unsever'd bond.
Long tract of ages by the angels past,
Ere the creating of another world,
Describ'd on Jerome's pages thou hast seen.
But that what I disclose to thee is true,
Those penmen, whom the Holy Spirit mov'd
In many a passage of their sacred book
Attest; as thou by diligent search shalt find
And reason in some sort discerns the same,
Who scarce would grant the heav'nly ministers
Of their perfection void, so long a space.
Thus when and where these spirits of love were made,
Thou know'st, and how: and knowing hast allay'd
Thy thirst, which from the triple question rose.
Ere one had reckon'd twenty, e'en so soon
Part of the angels fell: and in their fall
Confusion to your elements ensued.
The others kept their station: and this task,
Whereon thou lookst, began with such delight,
That they surcease not ever, day nor night,
Their circling.  Of that fatal lapse the cause
Was the curst pride of him, whom thou hast seen
Pent with the world's incumbrance.  Those, whom here
Thou seest, were lowly to confess themselves
Of his free bounty, who had made them apt
For ministries so high: therefore their views
Were by enlight'ning grace and their own merit
Exalted; so that in their will confirm'd
They stand, nor feel to fall.  For do not doubt,
But to receive the grace, which heav'n vouchsafes,
Is meritorious, even as the soul
With prompt affection welcometh the guest.
Now, without further help, if with good heed
My words thy mind have treasur'd, thou henceforth
This consistory round about mayst scan,
And gaze thy fill.  But since thou hast on earth
Heard vain disputers, reasoners in the schools,
Canvas the' angelic nature, and dispute
Its powers of apprehension, memory, choice;
Therefore, 't is well thou take from me the truth,
Pure and without disguise, which they below,
Equivocating, darken and perplex.

"Know thou, that, from the first, these substances,
Rejoicing in the countenance of God,
Have held unceasingly their view, intent
Upon the glorious vision, from the which
Naught absent is nor hid: where then no change
Of newness with succession interrupts,
Remembrance there needs none to gather up
Divided thought and images remote

"So that men, thus at variance with the truth
Dream, though their eyes be open; reckless some
Of error; others well aware they err,
To whom more guilt and shame are justly due.
Each the known track of sage philosophy
Deserts, and has a byway of his own:
So much the restless eagerness to shine
And love of singularity prevail.
Yet this, offensive as it is, provokes
Heav'n's anger less, than when the book of God
Is forc'd to yield to man's authority,
Or from its straightness warp'd: no reck'ning made
What blood the sowing of it in the world
Has cost; what favour for himself he wins,
Who meekly clings to it.  The aim of all
Is how to shine: e'en they, whose office is
To preach the Gospel, let the gospel sleep,
And pass their own inventions off instead.
One tells, how at Christ's suffering the wan moon
Bent back her steps, and shadow'd o'er the sun
With intervenient disk, as she withdrew:
Another, how the light shrouded itself
Within its tabernacle, and left dark
The Spaniard and the Indian, with the Jew.
Such fables Florence in her pulpit hears,
Bandied about more frequent, than the names
Of Bindi and of Lapi in her streets.
The sheep, meanwhile, poor witless ones, return
From pasture, fed with wind: and what avails
For their excuse, they do not see their harm?
Christ said not to his first conventicle,
'Go forth and preach impostures to the world,'
But gave them truth to build on; and the sound
Was mighty on their lips; nor needed they,
Beside the gospel, other spear or shield,
To aid them in their warfare for the faith.
The preacher now provides himself with store
Of jests and gibes; and, so there be no lack
Of laughter, while he vents them, his big cowl
Distends, and he has won the meed he sought:
Could but the vulgar catch a glimpse the while
Of that dark bird which nestles in his hood,
They scarce would wait to hear the blessing said.
Which now the dotards hold in such esteem,
That every counterfeit, who spreads abroad
The hands of holy promise, finds a throng
Of credulous fools beneath.  Saint Anthony
Fattens with this his swine, and others worse
Than swine, who diet at his lazy board,
Paying with unstamp'd metal for their fare.

"But (for we far have wander'd) let us seek
The forward path again; so as the way
Be shorten'd with the time.  No mortal tongue
Nor thought of man hath ever reach'd so far,
That of these natures he might count the tribes.
What Daniel of their thousands hath reveal'd
With finite number infinite conceals.
The fountain at whose source these drink their beams,
With light supplies them in as many modes,
As there are splendours, that it shines on: each
According to the virtue it conceives,
Differing in love and sweet affection.
Look then how lofty and how huge in breadth
The' eternal might, which, broken and dispers'd
Over such countless mirrors, yet remains
Whole in itself and one, as at the first."






Noon's fervid hour perchance six thousand miles
From hence is distant; and the shadowy cone
Almost to level on our earth declines;
When from the midmost of this blue abyss
By turns some star is to our vision lost.
And straightway as the handmaid of the sun
Puts forth her radiant brow, all, light by light,
Fade, and the spangled firmament shuts in,
E'en to the loveliest of the glittering throng.
Thus vanish'd gradually from my sight
The triumph, which plays ever round the point,
That overcame me, seeming (for it did)
Engirt by that it girdeth.  Wherefore love,
With loss of other object, forc'd me bend
Mine eyes on Beatrice once again.

If all, that hitherto is told of her,
Were in one praise concluded, 't were too weak
To furnish out this turn.  Mine eyes did look
On beauty, such, as I believe in sooth,
Not merely to exceed our human, but,
That save its Maker, none can to the full
Enjoy it.  At this point o'erpower'd I fail,
Unequal to my theme, as never bard
Of buskin or of sock hath fail'd before.
For, as the sun doth to the feeblest sight,
E'en so remembrance of that witching smile
Hath dispossess my spirit of itself.
Not from that day, when on this earth I first
Beheld her charms, up to that view of them,
Have I with song applausive ever ceas'd
To follow, but not follow them no more;
My course here bounded, as each artist's is,
When it doth touch the limit of his skill.

She (such as I bequeath her to the bruit
Of louder trump than mine, which hasteneth on,
Urging its arduous matter to the close),
Her words resum'd, in gesture and in voice
Resembling one accustom'd to command:
"Forth from the last corporeal are we come
Into the heav'n, that is unbodied light,
Light intellectual replete with love,
Love of true happiness replete with joy,
Joy, that transcends all sweetness of delight.
Here shalt thou look on either mighty host
Of Paradise; and one in that array,
Which in the final judgment thou shalt see."

As when the lightning, in a sudden spleen
Unfolded, dashes from the blinding eyes
The visive spirits dazzled and bedimm'd;
So, round about me, fulminating streams
Of living radiance play'd, and left me swath'd
And veil'd in dense impenetrable blaze.
Such weal is in the love, that stills this heav'n;
For its own flame the torch this fitting ever!

No sooner to my list'ning ear had come
The brief assurance, than I understood
New virtue into me infus'd, and sight
Kindled afresh, with vigour to sustain
Excess of light, however pure.  I look'd;
And in the likeness of a river saw
Light flowing, from whose amber-seeming waves
Flash'd up effulgence, as they glided on
'Twixt banks, on either side, painted with spring,
Incredible how fair; and, from the tide,
There ever and anon, outstarting, flew
Sparkles instinct with life; and in the flow'rs
Did set them, like to rubies chas'd in gold;
Then, as if drunk with odors, plung'd again
Into the wondrous flood; from which, as one
Re'enter'd, still another rose.  "The thirst
Of knowledge high, whereby thou art inflam'd,
To search the meaning of what here thou seest,
The more it warms thee, pleases me the more.
But first behooves thee of this water drink,
Or ere that longing be allay'd."  So spake
The day-star of mine eyes; then thus subjoin'd:
"This stream, and these, forth issuing from its gulf,
And diving back, a living topaz each,
With all this laughter on its bloomy shores,
Are but a preface, shadowy of the truth
They emblem: not that, in themselves, the things
Are crude; but on thy part is the defect,
For that thy views not yet aspire so high."
Never did babe, that had outslept his wont,
Rush, with such eager straining, to the milk,
As I toward the water, bending me,
To make the better mirrors of mine eyes
In the refining wave; and, as the eaves
Of mine eyelids did drink of it, forthwith
Seem'd it unto me turn'd from length to round,
Then as a troop of maskers, when they put
Their vizors off, look other than before,
The counterfeited semblance thrown aside;
So into greater jubilee were chang'd
Those flowers and sparkles, and distinct I saw
Before me either court of heav'n displac'd.

O prime enlightener! thou who crav'st me strength
On the high triumph of thy realm to gaze!
Grant virtue now to utter what I kenn'd,
    There is in heav'n a light, whose goodly shine
Makes the Creator visible to all
Created, that in seeing him alone
Have peace; and in a circle spreads so far,
That the circumference were too loose a zone
To girdle in the sun.  All is one beam,
Reflected from the summit of the first,
That moves, which being hence and vigour takes,
And as some cliff, that from the bottom eyes
Its image mirror'd in the crystal flood,
As if 't admire its brave appareling
Of verdure and of flowers: so, round about,
Eyeing the light, on more than million thrones,
Stood, eminent, whatever from our earth
Has to the skies return'd.  How wide the leaves
Extended to their utmost of this rose,
Whose lowest step embosoms such a space
Of ample radiance!  Yet, nor amplitude
Nor height impeded, but my view with ease
Took in the full dimensions of that joy.
Near or remote, what there avails, where God
Immediate rules, and Nature, awed, suspends
Her sway?  Into the yellow of the rose
Perennial, which in bright expansiveness,
Lays forth its gradual blooming, redolent
Of praises to the never-wint'ring sun,
As one, who fain would speak yet holds his peace,
Beatrice led me; and, "Behold," she said,
"This fair assemblage! stoles of snowy white
How numberless!  The city, where we dwell,
Behold how vast! and these our seats so throng'd
Few now are wanting here!  In that proud stall,
On which, the crown, already o'er its state
Suspended, holds thine eyes--or ere thyself
Mayst at the wedding sup,--shall rest the soul
Of the great Harry, he who, by the world
Augustas hail'd, to Italy must come,
Before her day be ripe.  But ye are sick,
And in your tetchy wantonness as blind,
As is the bantling, that of hunger dies,
And drives away the nurse.  Nor may it be,
That he, who in the sacred forum sways,
Openly or in secret, shall with him
Accordant walk: Whom God will not endure
I' th' holy office long; but thrust him down
To Simon Magus, where Magna's priest
Will sink beneath him: such will be his meed."






In fashion, as a snow-white rose, lay then
Before my view the saintly multitude,
Which in his own blood Christ espous'd.  Meanwhile
That other host, that soar aloft to gaze
And celebrate his glory, whom they love,
Hover'd around; and, like a troop of bees,
Amid the vernal sweets alighting now,
Now, clustering, where their fragrant labour glows,
Flew downward to the mighty flow'r, or rose
From the redundant petals, streaming back
Unto the steadfast dwelling of their joy.
Faces had they of flame, and wings of gold;
The rest was whiter than the driven snow.
And as they flitted down into the flower,
From range to range, fanning their plumy loins,
Whisper'd the peace and ardour, which they won
From that soft winnowing.  Shadow none, the vast
Interposition of such numerous flight
Cast, from above, upon the flower, or view
Obstructed aught.  For, through the universe,
Wherever merited, celestial light
Glides freely, and no obstacle prevents.

All there, who reign in safety and in bliss,
Ages long past or new, on one sole mark
Their love and vision fix'd.  O trinal beam
Of individual star, that charmst them thus,
Vouchsafe one glance to gild our storm below!

If the grim brood, from Arctic shores that roam'd,
(Where helice, forever, as she wheels,
Sparkles a mother's fondness on her son)
Stood in mute wonder 'mid the works of Rome,
When to their view the Lateran arose
In greatness more than earthly; I, who then
From human to divine had past, from time
Unto eternity, and out of Florence
To justice and to truth, how might I choose
But marvel too?  'Twixt gladness and amaze,
In sooth no will had I to utter aught,
Or hear.  And, as a pilgrim, when he rests
Within the temple of his vow, looks round
In breathless awe, and hopes some time to tell
Of all its goodly state: e'en so mine eyes
Cours'd up and down along the living light,
Now low, and now aloft, and now around,
Visiting every step.  Looks I beheld,
Where charity in soft persuasion sat,
Smiles from within and radiance from above,
And in each gesture grace and honour high.

So rov'd my ken, and its general form
All Paradise survey'd: when round I turn'd
With purpose of my lady to inquire
Once more of things, that held my thought suspense,
But answer found from other than I ween'd;
For, Beatrice, when I thought to see,
I saw instead a senior, at my side,
 Rob'd, as the rest, in glory.  Joy benign
Glow'd in his eye, and o'er his cheek diffus'd,
With gestures such as spake a father's love.
And, "Whither is she vanish'd?"  straight I ask'd.

"By Beatrice summon'd," he replied,
"I come to aid thy wish.  Looking aloft
To the third circle from the highest, there
Behold her on the throne, wherein her merit
Hath plac'd her."  Answering not, mine eyes I rais'd,
And saw her, where aloof she sat, her brow
A wreath reflecting of eternal beams.
Not from the centre of the sea so far
Unto the region of the highest thunder,
As was my ken from hers; and yet the form
Came through that medium down, unmix'd and pure,

"O Lady! thou in whom my hopes have rest!
Who, for my safety, hast not scorn'd, in hell
To leave the traces of thy footsteps mark'd!
For all mine eyes have seen, I, to thy power
And goodness, virtue owe and grace.  Of slave,
Thou hast to freedom brought me; and no means,
For my deliverance apt, hast left untried.
Thy liberal bounty still toward me keep.
That, when my spirit, which thou madest whole,
Is loosen'd from this body, it may find
Favour with thee."  So I my suit preferr'd:
And she, so distant, as appear'd, look'd down,
And smil'd; then tow'rds th' eternal fountain turn'd.

And thus the senior, holy and rever'd:
"That thou at length mayst happily conclude
Thy voyage (to which end I was dispatch'd,
By supplication mov'd and holy love)
Let thy upsoaring vision range, at large,
This garden through: for so, by ray divine
Kindled, thy ken a higher flight shall mount;
And from heav'n's queen, whom fervent I adore,
All gracious aid befriend us; for that I
Am her own faithful Bernard."  Like a wight,
Who haply from Croatia wends to see
Our Veronica, and the while 't is shown,
Hangs over it with never-sated gaze,
And, all that he hath heard revolving, saith
Unto himself in thought: "And didst thou look
E'en thus, O Jesus, my true Lord and God?
And was this semblance thine?"  So gaz'd I then
Adoring; for the charity of him,
Who musing, in the world that peace enjoy'd,
Stood lively before me.  "Child of grace!"
Thus he began: "thou shalt not knowledge gain
Of this glad being, if thine eyes are held
Still in this depth below.  But search around
The circles, to the furthest, till thou spy
Seated in state, the queen, that of this realm
Is sovran."  Straight mine eyes I rais'd; and bright,
As, at the birth of morn, the eastern clime
Above th' horizon, where the sun declines;
To mine eyes, that upward, as from vale
To mountain sped, at th' extreme bound, a part
Excell'd in lustre all the front oppos'd.
And as the glow burns ruddiest o'er the wave,
That waits the sloping beam, which Phaeton
Ill knew to guide, and on each part the light
Diminish'd fades, intensest in the midst;
So burn'd the peaceful oriflame, and slack'd
On every side the living flame decay'd.
And in that midst their sportive pennons wav'd
Thousands of angels; in resplendence each
Distinct, and quaint adornment. At their glee
And carol, smil'd the Lovely One of heav'n,
That joy was in the eyes of all the blest.

Had I a tongue in eloquence as rich,
As is the colouring in fancy's loom,
'T were all too poor to utter the least part
Of that enchantment.  When he saw mine eyes
Intent on her, that charm'd him, Bernard gaz'd
With so exceeding fondness, as infus'd
Ardour into my breast, unfelt before.






Freely the sage, though wrapt in musings high,
Assum'd the teacher's part, and mild began:
"The wound, that Mary clos'd, she open'd first,
Who sits so beautiful at Mary's feet.
The third in order, underneath her, lo!
Rachel with Beatrice. Sarah next,
Judith, Rebecca, and the gleaner maid,
Meek ancestress of him, who sang the songs
Of sore repentance in his sorrowful mood.
All, as I name them, down from deaf to leaf,
Are in gradation throned on the rose.
And from the seventh step, successively,
Adown the breathing tresses of the flow'r
Still doth the file of Hebrew dames proceed.
For these are a partition wall, whereby
The sacred stairs are sever'd, as the faith
In Christ divides them.  On this part, where blooms
Each leaf in full maturity, are set
Such as in Christ, or ere he came, believ'd.
On th' other, where an intersected space
Yet shows the semicircle void, abide
All they, who look'd to Christ already come.
And as our Lady on her glorious stool,
And they who on their stools beneath her sit,
This way distinction make: e'en so on his,
The mighty Baptist that way marks the line
(He who endur'd the desert and the pains
Of martyrdom, and for two years of hell,
Yet still continued holy), and beneath,
Augustin, Francis, Benedict, and the rest,
Thus far from round to round.  So heav'n's decree
Forecasts, this garden equally to fill.
With faith in either view, past or to come,
Learn too, that downward from the step, which cleaves
Midway the twain compartments, none there are
Who place obtain for merit of their own,
But have through others' merit been advanc'd,
On set conditions: spirits all releas'd,
Ere for themselves they had the power to choose.
And, if thou mark and listen to them well,
Their childish looks and voice declare as much.

"Here, silent as thou art, I know thy doubt;
And gladly will I loose the knot, wherein
Thy subtle thoughts have bound thee.  From this realm
Excluded, chalice no entrance here may find,
No more shall hunger, thirst, or sorrow can.
A law immutable hath establish'd all;
Nor is there aught thou seest, that doth not fit,
Exactly, as the finger to the ring.
It is not therefore without cause, that these,
O'erspeedy comers to immortal life,
Are different in their shares of excellence.
Our Sovran Lord--that settleth this estate
In love and in delight so absolute,
That wish can dare no further--every soul,
Created in his joyous sight to dwell,
With grace at pleasure variously endows.
And for a proof th' effect may well suffice.
And 't is moreover most expressly mark'd
In holy scripture, where the twins are said
To, have struggled in the womb.  Therefore, as grace
Inweaves the coronet, so every brow
Weareth its proper hue of orient light.
And merely in respect to his prime gift,
Not in reward of meritorious deed,
Hath each his several degree assign'd.
In early times with their own innocence
More was not wanting, than the parents' faith,
To save them: those first ages past, behoov'd
That circumcision in the males should imp
The flight of innocent wings: but since the day
Of grace hath come, without baptismal rites
In Christ accomplish'd, innocence herself
Must linger yet below.  Now raise thy view
Unto the visage most resembling Christ:
For, in her splendour only, shalt thou win
The pow'r to look on him."  Forthwith I saw
Such floods of gladness on her visage shower'd,
From holy spirits, winging that profound;
That, whatsoever I had yet beheld,
Had not so much suspended me with wonder,
Or shown me such similitude of God.
And he, who had to her descended, once,
On earth, now hail'd in heav'n; and on pois'd wing.
"Ave, Maria, Gratia Plena," sang:
To whose sweet anthem all the blissful court,
From all parts answ'ring, rang: that holier joy
Brooded the deep serene.  "Father rever'd:
Who deign'st, for me, to quit the pleasant place,
Wherein thou sittest, by eternal lot!
Say, who that angel is, that with such glee
Beholds our queen, and so enamour'd glows
Of her high beauty, that all fire he seems."
So I again resorted to the lore
Of my wise teacher, he, whom Mary's charms
Embellish'd, as the sun the morning star;
Who thus in answer spake: "In him are summ'd,
Whatever of buxomness and free delight
May be in Spirit, or in angel, met:
And so beseems: for that he bare the palm
Down unto Mary, when the Son of God
Vouchsaf'd to clothe him in terrestrial weeds.
Now let thine eyes wait heedful on my words,
And note thou of this just and pious realm
The chiefest nobles.  Those, highest in bliss,
The twain, on each hand next our empress thron'd,
Are as it were two roots unto this rose.
He to the left, the parent, whose rash taste
Proves bitter to his seed; and, on the right,
That ancient father of the holy church,
Into whose keeping Christ did give the keys
Of this sweet flow'r: near whom behold the seer,
That, ere he died, saw all the grievous times
Of the fair bride, who with the lance and nails
Was won.  And, near unto the other, rests
The leader, under whom on manna fed
Th' ungrateful nation, fickle and perverse.
On th' other part, facing to Peter, lo!
Where Anna sits, so well content to look
On her lov'd daughter, that with moveless eye
She chants the loud hosanna: while, oppos'd
To the first father of your mortal kind,
Is Lucia, at whose hest thy lady sped,
When on the edge of ruin clos'd thine eye.

"But (for the vision hasteneth so an end)
Here break we off, as the good workman doth,
That shapes the cloak according to the cloth:
And to the primal love our ken shall rise;
That thou mayst penetrate the brightness, far
As sight can bear thee.  Yet, alas! in sooth
Beating thy pennons, thinking to advance,
Thou backward fall'st.  Grace then must first be gain'd;
Her grace, whose might can help thee.  Thou in prayer
Seek her: and, with affection, whilst I sue,
Attend, and yield me all thy heart."  He said,
And thus the saintly orison began.






"O virgin mother, daughter of thy Son,
Created beings all in lowliness
Surpassing, as in height, above them all,
Term by th' eternal counsel pre-ordain'd,
Ennobler of thy nature, so advanc'd
In thee, that its great Maker did not scorn,
Himself, in his own work enclos'd to dwell!
For in thy womb rekindling shone the love
Reveal'd, whose genial influence makes now
This flower to germin in eternal peace!
Here thou to us, of charity and love,
Art, as the noon-day torch: and art, beneath,
To mortal men, of hope a living spring.
So mighty art thou, lady! and so great,
That he who grace desireth, and comes not
To thee for aidance, fain would have desire
Fly without wings.  Nor only him who asks,
Thy bounty succours, but doth freely oft
Forerun the asking.  Whatsoe'er may be
Of excellence in creature, pity mild,
Relenting mercy, large munificence,
Are all combin'd in thee.  Here kneeleth one,
Who of all spirits hath review'd the state,
From the world's lowest gap unto this height.
Suppliant to thee he kneels, imploring grace
For virtue, yet more high to lift his ken
Toward the bliss supreme.  And I, who ne'er
Coveted sight, more fondly, for myself,
Than now for him, my prayers to thee prefer,
(And pray they be not scant) that thou wouldst drive
Each cloud of his mortality away;
That on the sovran pleasure he may gaze.
This also I entreat of thee, O queen!
Who canst do what thou wilt! that in him thou
Wouldst after all he hath beheld, preserve
Affection sound, and human passions quell.
Lo!  Where, with Beatrice, many a saint
Stretch their clasp'd hands, in furtherance of my suit!"

The eyes, that heav'n with love and awe regards,
Fix'd on the suitor, witness'd, how benign
She looks on pious pray'rs: then fasten'd they
On th' everlasting light, wherein no eye
Of creature, as may well be thought, so far
Can travel inward.  I, meanwhile, who drew
Near to the limit, where all wishes end,
The ardour of my wish (for so behooved),
Ended within me. Beck'ning smil'd the sage,
That I should look aloft: but, ere he bade,
Already of myself aloft I look'd;
For visual strength, refining more and more,
Bare me into the ray authentical
Of sovran light.  Thenceforward, what I saw,
Was not for words to speak, nor memory's self
To stand against such outrage on her skill.
As one, who from a dream awaken'd, straight,
All he hath seen forgets; yet still retains
Impression of the feeling in his dream;
E'en such am I: for all the vision dies,
As 't were, away; and yet the sense of sweet,
That sprang from it, still trickles in my heart.
Thus in the sun-thaw is the snow unseal'd;
Thus in the winds on flitting leaves was lost
The Sybil's sentence.  O eternal beam!
(Whose height what reach of mortal thought may soar?)
Yield me again some little particle
Of what thou then appearedst, give my tongue
Power, but to leave one sparkle of thy glory,
Unto the race to come, that shall not lose
Thy triumph wholly, if thou waken aught
Of memory in me, and endure to hear
The record sound in this unequal strain.

Such keenness from the living ray I met,
That, if mine eyes had turn'd away, methinks,
I had been lost; but, so embolden'd, on
I pass'd, as I remember, till my view
Hover'd the brink of dread infinitude.

O grace! unenvying of thy boon! that gav'st
Boldness to fix so earnestly my ken
On th' everlasting splendour, that I look'd,
While sight was unconsum'd, and, in that depth,
Saw in one volume clasp'd of love, whatever
The universe unfolds; all properties
Of substance and of accident, beheld,
Compounded, yet one individual light
The whole.  And of such bond methinks I saw
The universal form: for that whenever
I do but speak of it, my soul dilates
Beyond her proper self; and, till I speak,
One moment seems a longer lethargy,
Than five-and-twenty ages had appear'd
To that emprize, that first made Neptune wonder
At Argo's shadow darkening on his flood.

With fixed heed, suspense and motionless,
Wond'ring I gaz'd; and admiration still
Was kindled, as I gaz'd.  It may not be,
That one, who looks upon that light, can turn
To other object, willingly, his view.
For all the good, that will may covet, there
Is summ'd; and all, elsewhere defective found,
Complete.  My tongue shall utter now, no more
E'en what remembrance keeps, than could the babe's
That yet is moisten'd at his mother's breast.
Not that the semblance of the living light
Was chang'd (that ever as at first remain'd)
But that my vision quickening, in that sole
Appearance, still new miracles descry'd,
And toil'd me with the change.  In that abyss
Of radiance, clear and lofty, seem'd methought,
Three orbs of triple hue clipt in one bound:
And, from another, one reflected seem'd,
As rainbow is from rainbow: and the third
Seem'd fire, breath'd equally from both.  Oh speech
How feeble and how faint art thou, to give
Conception birth!  Yet this to what I saw
Is less than little.  Oh eternal light!
Sole in thyself that dwellst; and of thyself
Sole understood, past, present, or to come!
Thou smiledst; on that circling, which in thee
Seem'd as reflected splendour, while I mus'd;
For I therein, methought, in its own hue
Beheld our image painted: steadfastly
I therefore por'd upon the view.  As one
Who vers'd in geometric lore, would fain
Measure the circle; and, though pondering long
And deeply, that beginning, which he needs,
Finds not; e'en such was I, intent to scan
The novel wonder, and trace out the form,
How to the circle fitted, and therein
How plac'd: but the flight was not for my wing;
Had not a flash darted athwart my mind,
And in the spleen unfolded what it sought.

Here vigour fail'd the tow'ring fantasy:
But yet the will roll'd onward, like a wheel
In even motion, by the Love impell'd,
That moves the sun in heav'n and all the stars.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vision of Paradise, Complete
by Dante Alighieri, Translated By The Rev. H. F. Cary,
Illustrated by Gustave Dore


*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VISION OF PARADISE, COMPLETE ***

***** This file should be named 8799.txt or 8799.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/8/7/9/8799/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




My dear lads: Although so long a time has elapsed since the great civil
war in England, men are still almost as much divided as they were then
as to the merits of the quarrel, almost as warm partisans of the one
side or the other. Most of you will probably have formed an opinion as
to the rights of the case, either from your own reading, or from hearing
the views of your elders.

For my part, I have endeavored to hold the scales equally, to relate
historical facts with absolute accuracy, and to show how much of right
and how much of wrong there was upon either side. Upon the one hand, the
king by his instability, bad faith, and duplicity alienated his best
friends, and drove the Commons to far greater lengths than they had at
first dreamed of. Upon the other hand, the struggle, begun only to win
constitutional rights, ended--owing to the ambition, fanaticism, and
determination to override all rights and all opinions save their own, of
a numerically insignificant minority of the Commons, backed by the
strength of the army--in the establishment of the most complete
despotism England has ever seen.

It may no doubt be considered a failing on my part that one of my heroes
has a very undue preponderance of adventure over the other. This I
regret; but after the scale of victory turned, those on the winning side
had little to do or to suffer, and one's interest is certainly with the
hunted fugitive, or the slave in the Bermudas, rather than with the
prosperous and well-to-do citizen.


 .

THE EVE OF THE WAR.


It was a pleasant afternoon in the month of July, 1642, when three young
people sat together on a shady bank at the edge of a wood some three
miles from Oxford. The country was undulating and picturesque, and a
little more than a mile in front of them rose the lofty spire of St.
Helen's, Abingdon. The party consisted of two lads, who were about
fifteen years of age, and a girl of ten. The lads, although of about the
same height and build, were singularly unlike. Herbert Rippinghall was
dark and grave, his dress somber in hue, but good in material and well
made. Harry Furness was a fair and merry-looking boy; good humor was the
distinguishing characteristic of his face; his somewhat bright and
fashionably cut clothes were carelessly put on, and it was clear that no
thought of his own appearance or good looks entered his mind. He wore
his hair in ringlets, and had on his head a broad hat of felt with a
white feather, while his companion wore a plain cap, and his hair was
cut closely to his head.

"It is a bad business, Harry," the latter said, "but, there is one
satisfaction that, come what may, nothing can disturb our friendship. We
have never had a quarrel since we first met at the old school down
there, six years ago. We have been dear friends always, and my only
regret has been that your laziness has prevented our being rivals, for
neither would have grudged the other victory."

"No, indeed, Herbert. But there was never a chance of that. You have
always been Mr. Gregory's prize boy, and are now head of the school;
while I have always been in his bad books. But, as you say, Herbert, we
have been dear friends, and, come what will, we'll continue so. We
cannot agree on the state of the kingdom, and shall never do so. We have
both taken our views from our parents; and indeed it seems to me that
the question is far too difficult a one for boys like us to form any
opinion of it. When we see some of the best and wisest in the land
ranging themselves on either side, it is clear that even such a wise
noddle as yours--to say nothing of a feather brain like mine--cannot
form any opinion on a subject which perplexes our elders and betters."

"That is true, Harry; but still--"

"No, no, Herbert, we will have no argument. You have the best of it
there, and I fall back upon authority. My father, the colonel, is for
the king; yours for the Parliament. He says that there are faults on
both sides, and indeed, for years he favored the Commons. The king's
acts were unconstitutional and tyrannical, and my father approved of the
bold stand which Sir George Elliot made against him. Now, however, all
this has been changed, he tells me, and the Commons seek to rule without
either king or peers. They have sought to impose conditions which would
render them the lords absolute of England, and reduce the king to a mere
puppet. They have, too, attacked the Church, would abolish bishops, and
interfere in all matters spiritual. Therefore, my father, while
acknowledging the faults which the king has committed, and grieving
over the acts which have driven the Parliament to taking up a hostile
attitude to him, yet holds it his duty to support him against the
violent men who have now assumed power, and who are aiming at the
subversion of the constitution and the loss of the country."

"I fear, also," Herbert said, "that the Commons have gone grievously
beyond their rights, although, did my father hear me say so, I should
fall under his gravest displeasure. But he holds that it is necessary
that there should be an ecclesiastical sweep, that the prelates should
have no more power in the land, that popery should be put down with an
iron hand, and that, since kings cannot be trusted to govern well, all
power should be placed in the hands of the people. My own thoughts do
incline toward his; but, as you say, when one sees men like my Lord
Falkland, who have hitherto stood among the foremost in the ranks of
those who demand that the king shall govern according to law, now siding
with him against them, one cannot but feel how grave are the
difficulties, and how much is to be said on either side. How is one to
choose? The king is overbearing, haughty, and untrue to his word. The
Parliament is stiff-necked and bent upon acquiring power beyond what is
fair and right. There are, indeed, grievous faults on both sides. But it
seems to me that should the king now have his way and conquer the
Commons, he and his descendants will henceforth govern as absolute
monarchs, and the liberty of the people will be endangered; while on the
other hand, should the Parliament gain the upper hand, they will place
on a firm basis the liberties of Englishmen, and any excesses which they
may commit will be controlled and modified by a future parliament, for
the people of England will no more suffer tyranny on the part of the
Commons than of the king; but while they cannot change the one, it is
in their power to elect whom they will, and to send up men who will
govern things moderately and wisely."

"At any rate," Harry said, "my father thinks that there is neither
moderation nor wisdom among the zealots at Westminster; and as I hear
that many nobles and country gentlemen throughout England are of the
same opinion, methinks that though at present the Parliament have the
best of it, and have seized Portsmouth, and the Tower, and all the
depots of arms, yet that in the end the king will prevail against them."

"I trust," Herbert continued earnestly, "that there will be no fighting.
England has known no civil wars since the days of the Roses, and when we
see how France and Germany are torn by internal dissensions, we should
be happy indeed that England has so long escaped such a scourge. It is
indeed sad to think that friends should be arrayed against each other in
a quarrel in which both sides are in the wrong."

"I hope," Harry said, "that if they needs must fight, it will soon be
over, whichever way fortune may turn."

"I think not," Herbert answered. "It is a war of religion as much as a
war for power. The king and the Commons may strive who shall govern the
realm; but the people who will take up arms will do it more for the
triumph of Protestantism than for that of Pym and Hampden."

"How tiresome you both are," Lucy Rippinghall interrupted, pouting. "You
brought me out to gather flowers, and you do nothing but talk of kings
and Parliament, as if I cared for them. I call it very rude. Herbert is
often forgetful, and thinks of his books more than of me; but you,
Master Harry, are always polite and gentle, and I marvel much that you
should be so changed to-day."

"Forgive me," Harry said, smiling. "We have been very remiss, Miss
Lucy; but we will have no more of high politics, and will, even if never
again," he said sadly, "devote all our energies to getting such a basket
of flowers for you as may fill your rooms with beaupots. Now, if your
majesty is ready to begin, we are your most obedient servants."

And so, with a laugh, the little party rose to their feet, and started
in quest of wild flowers.

The condition of affairs was at the outbreak of the civil war such as
might well puzzle older heads than those of Harry Furness or Herbert
Rippinghall, to choose between the two powers who were gathering arms.

The foundations of the difficulty had been laid in the reign of King
James. That monarch, who in figure, manners, and mind was in the
strongest contrast to all the English kings who had preceded him, was
infinitely more mischievous than a more foolish monarch could have been.
Coarse in manner--a buffoon in demeanor--so weak, that in many matters
he suffered himself to be a puppet in the hands of the profligates who
surrounded him, he had yet a certain amount of cleverness, and an
obstinacy which nothing could overcome. He brought with him from
Scotland an overweening opinion of the power and dignity of his position
as a king. The words--absolute monarchy--had hitherto meant only a
monarch free from foreign interference; to James they meant a monarchy
free from interference on the part of Lords or Commons. He believed
implicitly in the divine right of kings to do just as they chose, and in
all things, secular and ecclesiastical, to impose their will upon their
subjects.

At that time, upon the Continent, the struggle of Protestantism and
Catholicism was being fought out everywhere. In France the Huguenots
were gradually losing ground, and were soon to be extirpated. In
Germany the Protestant princes had lost ground. Austria, at one time
halting between two opinions, had now espoused vehemently the side of
the pope, and save in Holland and Switzerland, Catholicism was
triumphing all along the line. While the sympathies of the people of
England were strongly in favor of their co-religionists upon the
Continent, those of James inclined toward Catholicism, and in all
matters ecclesiastical he was at variance with his subjects. What
caused, if possible, an even deeper feeling of anger than his
interference in church matters, was his claim to influence the decisions
of the law courts. The pusillanimity of the great mass of the judges
hindered them from opposing his outrageous claims, and the people saw
with indignation and amazement the royal power becoming infinitely
greater and more extended than anything to which Henry VIII. or even
Elizabeth had laid claim. The negotiations of the king for a marriage
between his son and the Infanta of Spain raised the fears of the people
to the highest point. The remembrance of the Spanish armada was still
fresh in their minds, and they looked upon an alliance with Spain as the
most unholy of contracts, and as threatening alike the religion and
liberties of Englishmen.

Thus when at King James' death King Charles ascended the throne, he
inherited a legacy of trouble. Unhappily, his disposition was even more
obstinate than that of his father. His training had been wholly bad, and
he had inherited the pernicious ideas of his father in reference to the
rights of kings. Even more unfortunately, he had inherited his father's
counselors. The Duke of Buckingham, a haughty, avaricious, and ambitious
noble, raised by King James from obscurity, urged him to follow the path
of his father, and other evil counselors were not wanting. King
Charles, indeed, had an advantage over his father, inasmuch as his
person was stately and commanding, his manner grave and dignified, and
his private life irreproachable. The conflicts which had continued
throughout the reign of his father between king and Parliament speedily
broke out afresh. The Commons refused to grant supplies, unless the king
granted rights and privileges which he deemed alike derogatory and
dangerous. The shifty foreign policy of England was continued, and soon
the breach was as wide as it had been during the previous reign.

After several Parliaments had been called and dissolved, some gaining
advantage from the necessities of the king, others meeting only to
separate after discussions which imbittered the already existing
relations, for ten years the king dispensed with a Parliament. The
murder of the Duke of Buckingham by Felton brought no alleviation to the
situation. In Ireland, Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, ruled with
tyrannical power. He was a man of clear mind and of great talent, and
his whole efforts were devoted to increasing the power of the king, and
so, as he considered, the benefit of the country. In Ireland he had a
submissive Parliament, and by the aid of this he raised moneys, and
ruled in a manner which, tyrannical as it was, was yet for the benefit
of that country. The king had absolute confidence in him, and his advice
was ever on the side of resistance to popular demands. In England the
chief power was given to Archbishop Land, a high church prelate, bent
upon restoring many of the forms of Catholic worship, and bitterly
opposed to the Puritan spirit which pervaded the great mass of the
English people.

So far the errors had been entirely upon the side of the king. The
demands of the Commons had been justified by precedent and
constitutional rule. The doings of the king were in equal opposition to
these. When at last the necessity of the situation compelled Charles to
summon a Parliament, he was met by them in a spirit of absolute
defiance. Before any vote of supply would he taken, the Commons insisted
upon the impeachment of Strafford, and Charles weakly consented to this.
The trial was illegally carried on, and the evidence weak and doubtful.
But the king's favorite was marked out for destruction, and to the joy
of the whole kingdom was condemned and executed. A similar fate befell
Laud, and encouraged by these successes, the demands of the Commons
became higher and higher.

The ultimatum which at last the Puritan party in Parliament delivered to
the king, was that no man should remain in the royal council who was not
agreeable to Parliament; that no deed of the king should have validity
unless it passed the council, and was attested under their hands; that
all the officers of the state and principal judges should be chosen with
consent of Parliament, and enjoy their offices for life; that none of
the royal family should marry without consent of Parliament or the
council; that the penal laws should be executed against Catholics; that
the votes of popish lords should not be received in the Peers, and that
bishops should be excluded from the House; that the reformation of the
liturgy and church government should be carried out according to the
advice of Parliament; that the ordinances which they had made with
regard to the militia should be submitted to; that the justice of
Parliament should pass upon all delinquents, that is, upon all officials
of the state and country who had assisted in carrying out the king's
ordinances for the raising of taxes; that a general pardon should he
granted, with such exceptions as should he advised by Parliament; that
the fort and castles should be disposed of by consent of Parliament;
and that no peers should be made but with the consent of both Houses.
They demanded also that they should have the power of appointing and
dismissing the royal ministers, of naming guardians for the royal
children, and of virtually controlling military, civil, and religious
affairs.

As it was clear that these demands went altogether beyond the rights of
the Commons, and that if the king submitted to them the power of the
country would be solely in their hands, while he himself would become a
cipher, he had no course open to him but to refuse assent, and to appeal
to the loyal nobility and gentry of the country.

It is true that many of these rights have since been obtained by the
Houses of Parliament; but it must be remembered that they were
altogether alien at the time to the position which the kings of England
had hitherto held, and that the body into whose hands they would be
intrusted would be composed solely of one party in the state, and that
this party would be controlled by the fanatical leaders and the
ministers of the sects opposed to the Established Church, which were at
that time bitter, narrow, and violent to an extent of which we have now
no conception.

The attitude thus assumed by Parliament drove from their ranks a great
many of the most intelligent and enlightened of those who had formerly
sided with them in their contest against the king. These gentlemen felt
that intolerable as was the despotic power of a king, still more
intolerable would it be to be governed by the despotic power of a group
of fanatics. The liberty of Englishmen was now as much threatened by the
Commons as it had been threatened by the king, and to loyal gentlemen
the latter alternative was preferable. Thus there were on both sides
earnest and conscientious men who grieved deeply at being forced to
draw swords in such a quarrel, and who felt that their choice of sides
was difficult in the extreme. Falkland was the typical soldier on the
royal side, Hampden on that of the Commons.

It is probable that were England divided to-morrow under the same
conditions, men would be equally troubled upon which side to range
themselves. At this period of the struggle, with the exception of a few
hot-headed followers of the king and a few zealots on the side of the
Commons, there was a general hope that matters would shortly be
arranged, and that one conflict would settle the struggle.

The first warlike demonstration was made before the town of York, before
whose walls the king, arriving with an armed force, was refused
admittance by Sir John Hotham, who held the place for the Parliament.
This was the signal for the outbreak of the war, and each party
henceforth strained every nerve to arm themselves and to place their
forces in the field.

The above is but a brief sketch of the circumstances which led the
Cavaliers and Puritans of England to arm themselves for civil war. Many
details have been omitted, the object being not to teach the history of
the time, but to show the general course of events which had led to so
broad and strange a division between the people of England. Even now,
after an interval of two hundred years, men still discuss the subject
with something like passion, and are as strong in their sympathies
toward one side or the other as in the days when their ancestors took up
arms for king or Commons.

It is with the story of the war which followed the conversation of Harry
Furness and Herbert Rippinghall that we have to do, not with that of the
political occurrences which preceded it. As to these, at least, no
doubts or differences of opinion can arise. The incidents of the war,
its victories and defeats, its changing fortunes, and its final triumph
are matters beyond the domain of politics, or of opinion; and indeed
when once the war began politics ceased to have much further sway. The
original questions were lost sight of, and men fought for king or
Parliament just as soldiers nowadays fight for England or France,
without in any concerning themselves with the original grounds of
quarrel.




 

FOR THE KING.


It was late that evening when Sir Henry Furness returned from Oxford;
but Harry, anxious to hear the all-absorbing news of the day, had waited
up for him.

"What news, father?" he said, as Sir Henry alighted at the door.

"Stirring news, Harry; but as dark as may be. War appears to be now
certain. The king has made every concession, but the more he is ready to
grant, the more those Puritan knaves at Westminster would force from
him. King, peers, bishops, Church, all is to go down before this knot of
preachers; and it is well that the king has his nobles and gentry still
at his back. I have seen Lord Falkland, and he has given me a commission
in the king's name to raise a troop of horse. The royal banner will be
hoisted at Nottingham, and there he will appeal to all his loyal
subjects for aid against those who seek to govern the nation."

"And you think, sir, that it will really be war now?" Harry asked.

"Ay, that will it, unless the Commons go down on their knees and ask his
majesty's pardon, of which there is, methinks, no likelihood. As was to
be expected, the burghers and rabble of the large towns are everywhere
with them, and are sending up petitions to the Commons to stand fast and
abolish everything. However, the country is of another way of thinking,
and though the bad advisers of the king have in times past taken
measures which have sorely tried our loyalty, that is all forgotten
now. His majesty has promised redress to all grievances, and to rule
constitutionally in future, and I hear that the nobles are calling out
their retainers in all parts. England has always been governed by her
kings since she was a country, and we are going to try now whether we
are to be governed in future by our kings or by every tinker, tailor,
preacher, or thief sent up to Westminster. I know which is my choice,
and to-morrow I shall set about raising a troop of lads of the same
mind."

"You mean to take me, sir, I hope," Harry said.

"Take you?" his lather repeated, laughing. "To do what?"

"To fight, certainly," Harry replied. "I am sure that among the tenants
there is not one who could use the small sword as I can, for you have
taught me yourself, and I do not think that I should be more afraid of
the London pikemen than the best of them."

"No, no, Harry," his father said, putting his hand on the boy's
shoulder; "I do not doubt your bravery. You come of a fighting stock
indeed, and good blood cannot lie. But you are too young, my boy."

"But if the war goes on for a couple of years, father."

"Ay, ay, my boy; but I hope that it will be ended in a couple of months.
If it should last--which God forbid!--you shall have your chance, never
fear. Or, Harry, should you hear that aught has happened to me, mount
your horse at once, my boy; ride to the army, and take your place at the
head of my tenants. They will of course put an older hand in command;
but so long as a Furness is alive, whatever be his age, he must ride at
the head of the Furness tenants to strike for the king. I hear, by the
way, Harry, that that Puritan knave, Rippinghall, the wool-stapler, is
talking treason among his hands, and says that he will add a brave
contingent to the bands of the Commons when they march hither. Hast
heard aught about it?"

"Nothing, father, but I hope it is not true. I know, however, that
Master Rippinghall's thoughts and opinions lie in that direction, for I
have heard from Herbert--"

"Ah, the son of the wool-stapler. Hark you, Harry, this is a time when
we must all take sides for or against the king. Hitherto I have
permitted your acquaintance with the wool-stapler's son, though, in
truth, he be by birth no fit companion for you. But times have changed
now. The sword is going to be drawn, and friends of the king can no
longer be grip hands with friends of the Commons. Did my own brother
draw sword for Parliament, we would never speak again. Dost hear?"

"Yes, sir; and will of course obey your order, should you determine that
I must speak no more to Herbert. But, as you say, I am a boy yet, too
young to ride to the wars, and Herbert is no older. It will be time for
us to quarrel when it is time for us to draw the sword."

"That is so, Harry, and I do not altogether forbid you speaking with
him. Still the less you are seen together, the better. I like the lad,
and have made him welcome here for your sake. He is a thoughtful lad,
and a clever one; but it is your thoughtful men who plot treason, and
until the storm be overpast, it is best that you see as little of him as
may be. And now I have eaten my supper, and it is long past the time
that you should have been in bed. Send down word by Thomas Hardway to
Master Drake, my steward, to bid him send early in the morning notices
that all my tenants shall assemble here to-morrow at four in the
afternoon, and bid the cook come to me. We shall have a busy day
to-morrow, for the Furness tenantry never gather at the hall and go out
empty. And short though be the notice, they shall not do so this time,
which to some of us may, perchance, be the last."

The next day there was bustle and hurry at Furness Hall. The ponds were
dragged for fish; the poultry yard was scoured for its finest birds; the
keepers were early afield, and when they returned with piles of hares
and rabbits, these were seized by the cook and converted into huge pies
and pasties. Two sheep were slaughtered, and the scullions were hard at
work making confections of currants, gooseberries, plums, and other
fruits from the garden. In the great hall the tables were laid, and when
this was done, and all was in readiness, the serving men were called up
to the armory, and there, throughout the day, the cleaning of swords and
iron caps, the burnishing of breast and back pieces, the cleaning of
firelocks, and other military work went on with all haste.

The Furness estates covered many a square mile of Berkshire, and fifty
sturdy yeomen dismounted before Furness Hall at the hour named by Sir
Henry. A number of grooms and serving men were in attendance, and took
the horses as they rode up, while the major-domo conducted them to the
great picture gallery. Here they were received by Sir Henry with a
stately cordiality, and the maids handed round a great silver goblet
filled with spiced wine.

At four exactly the major-domo entered and announced that the quota was
complete, and that every one of those summoned was present.

"Serve the tables then," Sir Henry said, as he led the Way to the great
dining-hall.

Sir Henry took the head of the broad table, and bade Harry sit on his
right hand, while the oldest of the tenants faced him at the opposite
end. Then a troop of servants entered bearing smoking joints, cold
boars' heads, fish, turkeys, geese, and larded capons. These were
placed upon the table, with an abundance of French wine, and of strong
ale for those who preferred it, to wash down the viands. The first
courses were followed by dishes of meats and confections, and when all
was finished and cleared away Sir Henry Furness rose to his feet.

"Fill your glasses all," he said; "and bumpers. The toast which I give
you to-day is 'The king, God bless him.' Never should Englishmen drink
his health more earnestly and solemnly than to-day, when rebels have
driven him from his capital, and pestilent traitors threatened him with
armed force. Perhaps, my friends, you, like me, may from time to time
have grumbled when the tax-collectors have come round, and you have seen
no one warrant for their demands. But if the king has been forced so to
exceed his powers, it was in no slight degree because those at
Westminster refused to grant him the sums which were needful. He has,
too, been surrounded by bad advisers. I myself loved not greatly either
Stratford or Laud. But I would rather bear their high-handed ways, which
were at least aimed to strengthen the kingdom and for the honor of the
king, than be ground by these petty tyrants at Westminster, who would
shut up our churches, forbid us to smile on a Sunday, or to pray, except
through our noses; who would turn merry England into a canting
conventicle, and would rule us with a rod to which that of the king were
as a willow wand. Therefore it is the duty of all true men and good to
drink the health of his majesty the king, and confusion to his enemies."

Upstanding, and with enthusiastic shouts, the whole of the tenants drank
the toast. Sir Henry was pleased with the spirit which was manifested,
and when the cheering had subsided and quiet was again restored, he went
on:

"My friends, I have summoned you here to tell you what many of you no
doubt know already--that the king, driven from London by the traitors of
Parliament, who would take from him all power, would override the peers,
and abolish the Church, has appealed to his faithful subjects to stand
by him, and to maintain his cause. He will, ere a fortnight be past,
raise his banner at Nottingham. Already Sir John Hotham, the rebel
Governor of York, has closed the gates of that city to him, and it is
time that all loyal men were on foot to aid his cause. Lord Falkland has
been pleased to grant me a commission to raise a troop of horse in his
service, and I naturally come to you first, to ask you to follow me."

He paused a moment, and a shout of assent rang through the hall.

"There are," he said, "some among you whom years may prevent from
yourselves undertaking the hardships of the field, but these can send
substitutes in their sons. You will understand that none are compelled
to go; but I trust that from the long-standing friendship between us,
and from the duty which you each owe to the king, none will hold back.
Do I understand that all here are willing to join, or to furnish
substitutes?"

A general shout of "All" broke from the tenants.

"Thank you, my friends, I expected nothing else. This will give me fifty
good men, and true, and I hope that each will be able to bring with him
one, two, or more men, in proportion to the size of his holding. I shall
myself bear the expense of the arms and outfit of all these; but we must
not strip the land of hands. Farming must still go on, for people must
feed, even if there be war. As to the rents, we must waive our
agreements while the war lasts. Each man will pay me what proportion of
his rent he is able, and no more. The king will need money as well as
men, and as all I receive will be at his service, I know that each of
you will pay as much as he can to aid the common cause. I have here a
list of your names. My son will take it round to each, and will write
down how many men each of you may think to bring with him to the war. No
man must be taken unwillingly. I want only those whose hearts are in the
cause. My son is grieving that he is not old enough to ride with us; but
should aught befall me in the strife, I have bade him ride and take his
place among you."

Another cheer arose, and Harry went round the table taking down the
names and numbers of the men, and when his total was added up, it was
found that those present believed that they could bring a hundred men
with them into the field.

"This is beyond my hopes," Sir Harry said, as amid great cheering he
announced the result. "I myself will raise another fifty from my grooms,
gardeners, and keepers, and from brave lads I can gather in the village,
and I shall be proud indeed when I present to his majesty two hundred
men of Furness, ready to die in his defense."

After this there was great arrangement of details. Each tenant gave a
list of the arms which he possessed and the number of horses fit for
work, and as in those days, by the law of the land each man, of
whatsoever his degree, was bound to keep arms in order to join the
militia, should his services be required for the defense of the kingdom,
the stock of arms was, with the contents of Sir Henry's armory, found to
be sufficient for the number of men who were to be raised. It was eight
o'clock in the evening before all was arranged, and the party broke up
and separated to their homes.

For the next week there was bustle and preparation on the Furness
estates, as, indeed, through all England. As yet, however, the
Parliament were gathering men far more rapidly than the king. The
Royalists of England were slow to perceive how far the Commons intended
to press their demands, and could scarcely believe that civil war was
really to break out. The friends of the Commons, however, were
everywhere in earnest. The preachers in the conventicles throughout the
land denounced the king in terms of the greatest violence, and in almost
every town the citizens were arming and drilling. Lord Essex, who
commanded the Parliamentary forces, was drawing toward Northampton with
ten thousand men, consisting mainly of the train-bands of London; while
the king, with only a few hundred followers, was approaching Nottingham,
where he proposed to unfurl his standard and appeal to his subjects.

In a week from the day of the appeal of Sir Henry two troops, each of a
hundred men strong, drew up in front of Furness Hall. To the eye of a
soldier accustomed to the armies of the Continent, with their bands
trained by long and constant warfare, the aspect of this troop might not
have appeared formidable. Each man was dressed according to his fancy.
Almost all wore jack-boots coming nigh to the hip, iron breast and back
pieces, and steel caps. Sir Henry Furness and four gentlemen, his
friends, who had seen service in the Low Countries, and had now gladly
joined his band, took their places, Sir Henry himself at the head of the
body, and two officers with each troop. They, too, were clad in high
boots, with steel breast and back pieces, thick buff leather gloves, and
the wide felt hats with feathers which were worn in peace time. During
the war some of the Royalist officers wore iron caps as did their foes.
But the majority, in a spirit of defiance and contempt of their enemies,
wore the wide hat of the times, which, picturesque and graceful as it
was, afforded but a poor defense for the head. Almost all wore their
hair long and in ringlets, and across their shoulders were the white
scarfs typical of their loyalty to the king. Harry bestrode a fine horse
which his father had given him, and had received permission to ride for
half the day's march by his side at the head of the troop. The trumpeter
sounded the call, Sir Henry stood up in his stirrups, drew his sword and
waved it over his head, and shouted "For God and King." Two hundred
swords flashed in the air, and the answering shout came out deep and
full. Then the swords were sheathed, the horses' heads turned, and with
a jingle of sabers and accouterments the troop rode gayly out through
the gates of the park.

Upon their way north they were joined by more than one band of Cavaliers
marching in the same direction, and passed, too, several bodies of
footmen, headed by men with closely-cropped heads, and somber figures,
beside whom generally marched others whom their attire proclaimed to be
Puritan preachers, on their way to join the army of Essex. The parties
scowled at each other as they passed; but as yet no sword had been drawn
on either side, and without adventure they arrived at Nottingham.

Having distributed his men among the houses of the town, Sir Henry
Furness rode to the castle, where his majesty had arrived the day
before. He had already the honor of the personal acquaintance of the
king, for he had in one of the early parliaments sat for Oxford.
Disgusted, however, with the spirit that prevailed among the opponents
of the king, and also by the obstinacy and unconstitutional course
pursued by his majesty, he had at the dissolution of Parliament retired
to his estate, and when the next House was summoned, declined to stand
again for his seat.

"Welcome, Sir Henry," his majesty said graciously to him, "you are
among the many who withstood me somewhat in the early days of my reign,
and perchance you were right to do so; but who have now, in my need,
rallied round me, seeing whither the purpose of these traitorous
subjects of mine leads them. You are the more welcome that you have, as
I hear, brought two hundred horsemen with you, a number larger than any
which has yet joined me. These," he said, pointing to two young noblemen
near him, "are my nephews, Rupert and Maurice, who have come to join
me."

Upon making inquiries, Sir Henry found that the prospects of the king
were far from bright. So far, the Royalists had been sadly behindhand
with their preparations. The king had arrived with scarce four hundred
men. He had left his artillery behind at York for want of carriage, and
his need in arms was even greater than in men, as the arsenals of the
kingdom had all been seized by the Parliament. Essex lay at Northampton
with ten thousand men, and had he at this time advanced, even the most
sanguine of the Royalists saw that the struggle would be a hopeless one.

The next day, at the hour appointed, the royal standard was raised on
the Castle of Nottingham, in the midst of a great storm of wind and
rain, which before many hours had passed blew the royal standard to the
ground--an omen which those superstitiously inclined deemed of evil
augury indeed. The young noblemen and gentlemen, however, who had
gathered at Northampton, were not of a kind to be daunted by omens and
auguries, and finding that Essex did not advance and hearing news from
all parts of the country that the loyal gentlemen were gathering their
tenants fast, their hopes rose rapidly. There was, indeed, some
discontent when it was known that, by the advice of his immediate
councilors, King Charles had dispatched the Earl of Southampton with
Sir John Collpeper and Sir William Uvedale to London, with orders to
treat with the Commons. The Parliament, however, refused to enter into
any negotiations whatever until the king lowered his standard and
recalled the proclamation which he had issued. This, which would have
been a token of absolute surrender to the Parliament, the king refused
to do. He attempted a further negotiation; but this also failed.

The troops at Nottingham now amounted to eleven hundred men, of which
three hundred were infantry raised by Sir John Digby, the sheriff of the
county. The other eight hundred were horse. Upon the breaking off of
negotiations, and the advance of Essex, the king, sensible that he was
unable to resist the advance of Essex, who had now fifteen thousand men
collected under him, fell back to Derby, and thence to Shrewsbury, being
joined on his way by many nobles and gentlemen with their armed
followers. At Wellington, a town a day's march from Shrewsbury, the king
had his little army formed up, and made a solemn declaration before them
in which he promised to maintain the Protestant religion, to observe the
laws, and to uphold the just privileges and freedom of Parliament.

The Furness band were not present on that occasion, as they had been
dispatched to Worcester with some other soldiers, the whole under the
command of Prince Rupert, in order to watch the movements of Essex, who
was advancing in that direction. While scouring the ground around the
city, they came upon a body of Parliamentary cavalry, the advance of the
army of Essex. The bands drew up at a little distance from each other,
and then Prince Rupert gave the command to charge. With the cheer of
"For God and the king!" the troop rushed upon the cavalry of the
Parliament with such force and fury that they broke them utterly, and
killing many, drove them in confusion from the field, but small loss to
themselves.

This was the first action of the civil war, the first blood drawn by
Englishmen from Englishmen since the troubles in the commencement of the
reign of Mary.




 

A BRAWL AT OXFORD.


News in those days traveled but slowly, and England was full of
conflicting rumors as to the doings of the two armies. Every one was
unsettled. Bodies of men moving to join one or other of the parties kept
the country in an uproar, and the Cavaliers, or rather the toughs of the
towns calling themselves Cavaliers, brought much odium upon the royal
cause by the ill-treatment of harmless citizens, and by raids on
inoffensive country people. Later on this conduct was to be reversed and
the Royalists were to suffer tenfold the outrages now put upon the
Puritans. But there can be no doubt that the conduct of irresponsible
ruffians at that time did much to turn the flood of public opinion in
many places, where it would otherwise have remained neutral, against the
crown.

To Harry the time passed but slowly. He spent his days in Abingdon
hearing the latest news, and occasionally rode over to Oxford. This
city was throughout the civil war the heart of the Royalist party, and
its loss was one of the heaviest blows which befell the crown. Here
Harry found none but favorable reports current. Enthusiasm was at its
height. The university was even more loyal than the town, and bands of
lads smashed the windows of those persons who were supposed to favor the
Parliament. More than once Harry saw men pursued through the streets,
pelted with stones and mud, and in some cases escaping barely with
their lives. Upon one occasion, seeing a person in black garments and of
respectable appearance so treated, the boy's indignation was aroused,
for he himself, both from his conversations with his friend Herbert, and
the talk with his father, was, although enthusiastically Royalist, yet
inclined to view with respect those who held opposite opinions.

"Run down that alley!" he exclaimed, pushing his horse between the
fugitive and his pursuers.

The man darted down the lane, and Harry placed himself at the entrance,
and shouted to the rabble to abstain.

A yell of rage and indignation replied, and a volley of stones was
thrown. Harry fearlessly drew his sword, and cut at some of those who
were in the foreground. These retaliated with sticks, and Harry was
forced backward into the lane. This was too narrow to enable him to
turn, his horse, and his position was a critical one. Finding that he
was a mark for stones, he leaped from the saddle, thereby disappearing
from the sight of those in the ranks behind, and sword in hand, barred
the way to the foremost of his assailants. The contest, however, would
have been brief had not a party of young students come up the lane, and
seeing from Harry's attire that he was a gentleman, and likely to be of
Cavalier opinions, they at once, without inquiring the cause of the
fray, threw themselves into it, shouting "Gown! gown!" They speedily
drove the assailants back out of the lane; but these, reinforced by the
great body beyond, were then too strong for them. The shouts of the
young men, however, brought up others to their assistance, and a general
melee took place, townsmen and gownsmen throwing themselves into the
fray without any inquiry as to the circumstances from which it arose.
The young students carried swords, which, although contrary to the
statutes of the university, were for the time generally adopted. The
townspeople were armed with bludgeons, and in some cases with hangers,
and the fray was becoming a serious one, when it was abruptly terminated
by the arrival of a troop of horse, which happened to be coming into the
town to join the royal forces. The officer in command, seeing so
desperate a tumult raging, ordered his men to charge into the crowd, and
their interference speedily put an end to the fight.

Harry returned to their rooms with some of his protectors and their
wounds were bound up, and the circumstances of the fight were talked
over. Harry was much blamed by the college men when he said that he had
been drawn into the fray by protecting a Puritan. But when his new
friends learned that he was as thoroughly Royalist as themselves, and
that his father had gone with a troop to Nottingham, they took a more
favorable view of his action, but still assured him that it was the
height of folly to interfere to protect a rebel from the anger of the
townspeople.

"But, methinks," Harry said, "that it were unwise in the extreme to push
matters so far here. In Oxford the Royalists have it all their own way,
and can, of course, at will assault their Puritan neighbors. But it is
different in most other towns. There the Roundheads have the upper hand
and might retort by doing ill to the Cavaliers there. Surely it were
better to keep these unhappy differences out of private life, and to
trust the arbitration of our cause to the arms of our soldiers in the
field."

There was a general agreement that this would indeed be the wisest
course; but the young fellows were of opinion that hot heads on either
side would have their way, and that if the war went on attacks of this
kind by the one party on the other must be looked for.

Harry remained for some time with his friends in Christ church,
drinking the beer for which the college was famous. Then, mounting his
horse, he rode back to Abingdon.

Two days later, as he was proceeding toward the town, he met a man
dressed as a preacher.

"Young sir," the latter said, "may I ask if you are Master Furness?"

"I am," the lad replied.

"Then it is to you I am indebted for my rescue from those who assaulted
me in the streets of Oxford last week. In the confusion I could not see
your face, but I inquired afterward, and was told that my preserver was
Master Furness, and have come over to thank you for your courtesy and
bravery in thus intervening on behalf of one whom I think you regard as
an enemy, for I understand that Sir Henry, your father, has declared for
the crown."

"I acted," Harry said, "simply on the impulse of humanity, and hold it
mean and cowardly for a number of men to fall upon one."

"We are," the preacher continued, "at the beginning only of our
troubles, and the time may come when I, Zachariah Stubbs, may be able to
return to you the good service which you have done me. Believe me, young
sir, the feeling throughout England is strong for the Commons, and that
it will not be crushed out, as some men suppose, even should the king's
men gain a great victory over Essex--which, methinks, is not likely.
There are tens of thousands throughout the country who are now content
to remain quiet at home, who would assuredly draw the sword and go forth
to battle, should they consider their cause in danger. The good work has
begun, and the sword will not be sheathed until the oppressor is laid
low."

"We should differ who the oppressor is," Harry replied coldly. "I
myself am young to discuss these matters, but my father and those who
think with him consider that the oppression is at present on the side of
the Commons, and of those whose religious views you share. While
pretending to wish to be free, you endeavor to bind others beneath your
tyranny. While wishing to worship in your way unmolested, you molest
those who wish to worship in theirs. However, I thank you for your
offer, that should the time come your good services will be at my
disposal. As you say, the issue of the conflict is dark, and it may be,
though I trust it will not, that some day you may, if you will, return
the light service which I rendered you."

"You will not forget my name?" the preacher said--"Zachariah Stubbs, a
humble instrument of the Lord, and a preacher in the Independent chapel
at Oxford. Thither I cannot return, and am on my way to London, where I
have many friends, and where I doubt not a charge will be found for me.
I myself belong to the east countries, where the people are strong for
the Lord, and I doubt not that some of those I know will come to the
front of affairs, in which case my influence may perhaps be of more
service than you can suppose at present. Farewell, young sir, and
whatever be the issues of this struggle, I trust that you may safely
emerge from them."

The man lifted his broad black hat, and went on his way, and Harry rode
forward, smiling a little to himself at the promise given him.

The time passed slowly, and all kinds of rumors filled the land. At
length beacon fires were seen to blaze upon the hills, and, as it was
known that the Puritans had arranged with Essex that the news of a
victory was so to be conveyed to London, the hearts of the Royalists
sank, for they feared that disaster had befallen their cause. The next
day, however, horsemen of the Parliament galloping through the country
proclaimed that they had been defeated; but it was not till next day
that the true state of affairs became known. Then the news came that the
battle had indeed been a drawn one.

On the 26th of October Charles marched with his army into Oxford. So
complete was the ignorance of the inhabitants as to the movements of the
armies that at Abingdon the news of his coming was unknown, and Harry
was astonished on the morning of the 27th at hearing a great trampling
of horsemen. Looking out, he beheld his father at the head of the troop,
approaching the house. With a shout of joy the lad rushed downstairs and
met his father at the entrance.

"I did not look to be back so soon, Harry," Sir Henry said, as he
alighted from his horse. "We arrived at Oxford last night, and I am sent
on with my troop to see that no Parliament bands are lurking in the
neighborhood."

Before entering the house the colonel dismissed his troop, telling them
that until the afternoon they could return to their homes, but must then
re-assemble and hold themselves in readiness to advance, should he
receive further orders. Then, accompanied by his officers, he entered
the house. Breakfast was speedily prepared, and when this was done
justice to Sir Henry proceeded to relate to Harry, who was burning with
impatience to hear his news, the story of the battle of Edgehill.

"We reached Shrewsbury, as I wrote you," he said, "and stayed there
twenty days, and during that time the army swelled and many nobles and
gentlemen joined us. We were, however, it must be owned, but a motley
throng. The foot soldiers, indeed, were mostly armed with muskets; but
many had only sticks and cudgels. On the 12th we moved to Wolverhampton,
and so on through Birmingham and Kenilworth. We saw nothing of the
rebels till we met at Edgecot, a little hamlet near Banbury, where we
took post on a hill, the rebels being opposite to us. It must be owned,"
Sir Henry went on, "that things here did not promise well. There were
dissensions between Prince Rupert, who commanded the cavalry, and Lord
Lindsey, the general in chief, who is able and of great courage, but
hot-headed and fiery. In the morning it was determined to engage, as
Essex's forces had not all come up, and the king's troops were at least
as numerous as those of the enemy. We saw little of the fighting, for at
the commencement of the battle we got word to charge upon the enemy's
left. We made but short work of them, and drove them headlong from the
field, chasing them in great disorder for three miles, and taking much
plunder in Kineton among the Parliament baggage-wagons. Thinking that
the fight was over, we then prepared to ride back. When we came to the
field we found that all was changed. The main body of the Roundheads had
pressed hotly upon ours and had driven them back. Lord Lindsey himself,
who had gone into the battle at the head of the pikemen carrying a pike
himself like a common soldier, had been mortally wounded and taken
prisoner, and grievous slaughter had been inflicted. The king's standard
itself had been taken, but this had been happily recovered, for two
Royalist officers, putting on orange scarfs, rode into the middle of the
Roundheads, and pretending that they were sent by Essex, demanded the
flag from his secretary, to whom it had been intrusted. The scrivener
gave it up, and the officers, seizing it, rode through the enemy and
recovered their ranks. There was much confusion and no little angry
discussion in the camp that night, the footmen accusing the horsemen of
having deserted them, and the horsemen grumbling at the foot, because
they had not done their work as well as themselves. In the morning the
two armies still faced each other, neither being willing to budge a
foot, although neither cared to renew the battle. The rest of the
Parliamentary forces had arrived, and they might have struck us a heavy
blow had they been minded, for there was much discouragement in our
ranks. Lord Essex, however, after waiting a day and burying his dead,
drew off from the field, and we, remaining there, were able to claim the
victory, which, however, my son, was one of a kind which was scarce
worth winning. It was a sad sight to see so many men stretched stark and
dead, and these killed, not in fighting with a foreign foe, but with
other Englishmen. It made us all mightily sad, and if at that moment
Lord Essex had had full power from the Parliament to treat, methinks
that the quarrel could have been settled, all being mightily sick of
such kind of fighting."

"What is going to be done now, father?" Harry asked.

"We are going to move forward toward London. Essex is moving parallel
with us, and will try to get there first. From what we hear from our
friends in the city, there are great numbers of moderate men will be
glad to see the king back, and to agree to make an end of this direful
business. The zealots and preachers will of course oppose them. But when
we arrive, we trust that our countenance will enable our friends to make
a good front, and to overcome the opposition of the Puritans. We expect
that in a few days we shall meet with offers to treat. But whether or
no, I hope that the king will soon be lodged again in his palace at
Whitehall."

"And do you think that there will be any fighting, sir?"

"I think not. I sincerely hope not," the colonel said.

"Then if you think that there will only be a peaceable entry, will you
not let me ride with you? It will be a brave sight to see the king enter
London again; one to tell of all one's life."

The colonel made no reply for a minute or two.

"Well, Harry, I will not say you nay," he said at length. "Scenes of
broils and civil war are not for lads of your age. But, as you say, it
would be a thing to talk of to old age how you rode after the king when
he entered London in state. But mind, if there be fighting, you must
rein back and keep out of it."

Harry was overjoyed with the permission, for in truth time had hung
heavily on his hands since the colonel had ridden away. His
companionship with Herbert had ceased, for although the lads pressed
hands warmly when they met in Abingdon, both felt that while any day
might bring news of the triumph of one party or the other, it was
impossible that they could hold any warm intercourse with each other.
The school was closed, for the boys of course took sides, and so much
ill-will was caused that it was felt best to put a stop to it by closing
the doors. Harry therefore had been left entirely upon his own
resources, and although he had ridden about among the tenants and, so
far as he could, supplied his father's place, the time often hung heavy
on his hands, especially during the long hours of the evening. After
thanking his father for his kindness, he rushed wildly off to order his
horse to be prepared for him to accompany the troop, to re-burnish the
arms which he had already chosen as fitting him from the armory, and to
make what few preparations were necessary for the journey.

It was some days, however, before any move was made. The king was
occupied in raising money, being sorely crippled by want of funds, as
well as of arms and munitions of war. At the beginning of November the
advance was made, Sir Henry with his troop joining Prince Rupert, and
advancing through Reading without opposition as far as Maidenhead, where
he fixed his quarters. Two days later he learned that Essex had arrived
with his army in London. On the 11th King Charles was at Colnbrook. Here
he received a deputation from the Houses of Parliament, who proposed
that the king should pause in his advance until committees of both
Houses should attend him with propositions "for the removal of these
bloody distempers and distractions." The king received the deputation
favorably, and said that he would stop at Windsor, and there receive the
propositions which might be sent him.

Unfortunately, however, the hopes which were now entertained that peace
would be restored, were dashed to the ground by an action which was
ascribed by the Royalists to the hotheadedness of Prince Rupert, but
which the king's enemies affirmed was due to the duplicity of his
majesty himself. On this point there is no evidence. But it is certain
that the advance made after this deputation had been received rendered
all further negotiation impossible, as it inspired the Commons with the
greatest distrust, and enabled the violent portion always to feign a
doubt of the king's word, and great fears as to the keeping of any terms
which might be made, and so to act upon the timid and wavering. The very
day after the deputation had left, bearing the news to London of the
king's readiness to treat, and inspiring all there with hope of peace,
Prince Rupert, taking advantage of a very thick mist, marched his
cavalry to within half a mile of the town of Brentford before his
advance was discovered, designing to surprise the train of artillery at
Hammersmith and to push on and seize the Commons and the city.

The design might have been successful, for the exploits of Rupert's
horse at the battle of Edgehill had struck terror into the minds of the
enemy. In the town of Brentford, however, were lodged a regiment of
foot, under Hollis, and these prepared manfully to resist. Very
valiantly the prince, followed by his horse, charged into the streets of
Brentford, where the houses were barricaded by the foot soldiers, who
shot boldly against them. Many were killed, and for three hours the
contest was resolutely maintained. The streets had been barricaded, and
Prince Rupert's men fought at great disadvantage. At length, as evening
approached, and the main body of the Cavaliers came up, the Parliament
men gave way, and were driven from the town. Many were taken prisoners,
and others driven into the river, the greater portion, however, making
their way in boats safely down the stream. The delay which their sturdy
resistance had made saved the city. Hampden was bringing his men across
from Acton. Essex had marched from Chelsea Fields to Turnham Green, and
the road was now blocked. After it was dark the Train-Bands advanced,
and the Parliament regiments, reinforced by them, pushed on to Brentford
again; the Royalists, finding that the place could not be held, fell
back to the king's quarters at Hounslow.

The chroniclers describe how wild a scene of confusion reigned in London
that evening. Proclamations were issued ordering all men to take up
arms; shops were closed, the apprentice boys mustered in the ranks, and
citizens poured out like one man to defend the town. They encamped upon
the road, and the next day great trains of provisions sent by the wives
of the merchants and traders reached them, and as many came out to see
the forces, the scene along the road resembled a great fair.

In this fight at Brentford Harry Furness was engaged. The Royalists had
anticipated no resistance here, not knowing that Hollis held the place,
and Sir Henry did not think of ordering Harry to remain behind. At the
moment when it was found that Hollis was in force and the trumpets
sounded the charge, the lad was riding in the rear of the troop, talking
to one of the officers, and his father could take no step to prevent his
joining. Therefore, when the trumpets sounded and the troops started off
at full gallop toward the town, Harry, greatly exulting in his good
luck, fell in with them and rode down the streets of Brentford. The
musketry fire was brisk, and many of the troop rolled from their horses.
Presently they were dismounted and ordered to take the houses by storm.
With the hilts of their swords they broke in the doors, and there was
fierce lighting within.

Harry, who was rather bewildered with the din and turmoil of the fight,
did as the rest, and followed two or three of the men into one of the
houses, whose door had been broken open. They were assailed as they
entered by a fire of musketry from the Parliament men within. Those in
front fell, and Harry was knocked down by the butt of a pike.

When he recovered he found himself in a boat drifting down the stream, a
prisoner of the Roundheads.

For a long time Harry could hear the sounds of the guns and cannon at
Brentford, and looking round at the quiet villages which they passed on
the banks, could scarce believe that he had been engaged in a battle and
was now a prisoner. But little was said to him. The men were smarting
under their defeat and indulged in the bitterest language at the
treachery with which, after negotiations had been agreed upon, the
advance of the Royalists had been made. They speedily discovered the
youth of their captive, and, after telling him brutally that he would
probably be hung when he got to London, they paid no further attention
to him. The boat was heavily laden, and rowed by two oars, and the
journey down was a long one, for the tide met them when at the village
of Hammersmith, and they were forced to remain tied up to a tree by the
bank until it turned again. This it did not do until far in the night,
and the morning was just breaking when they reached London.

It was perhaps well for Harry that they arrived in the dark, for in the
excited state of the temper of the citizens, and their anger at the
treachery which had been practiced, it might have fared but badly with
him. He was marched along the Strand to the city, and was consigned to a
lock-up in Finsbury, until it could be settled what should be done to
him. In fact, the next day his career was nearly being terminated, for
John Lilburn, a captain of the Train Bands, who had been an apprentice
and imprisoned for contumacy, had been captured at Brentford, and after
being tried for his life, was sentenced to death as a rebel. Essex,
however, sent in word to the Royalist camp that for every one of the
Parliament officers put to death, he would hang three Royalist
prisoners. This threat had its effect, and Harry remained in ignorance
of the danger which had threatened him.

The greatest inconvenience which befell him was that he was obliged to
listen to all sorts of long harangues upon the part of the Puritan
soldiers who were his jailers. These treated him as a misguided lad, and
did their best to convert him from the evil of his ways. At last Harry
lost his temper, and said that if they wanted to hang him, they might;
but that he would rather put up with that than the long sermons which
they were in the habit of delivering to him. Indignant at this rejection
of their good offices, they left him to himself, and days passed without
his receiving any visit save that of the soldier who brought his meals.




 

BREAKING PRISON.


Harry's place of confinement was a cell leading off a guardroom of the
Train Bands. Occasionally the door was left open, as some five or six
men were always there, and Harry could see through the open door the
citizens of London training at arms. Several preachers were in the habit
of coming each day to discourse to those on guard, and so while away the
time, and upon these occasions the door was generally left open, in
order that the prisoner might be edified by the sermons. Upon one
occasion the preacher, a small, sallow-visaged man, looked into the cell
at the termination of his discourse, and seeing Harry asleep on his
truckle bed, awoke him, and lectured him severely on the wickedness of
allowing such precious opportunities to pass. After this he made a point
of coming in each day when he had addressed the guard, and of offering
up a long and very tedious prayer on behalf of the young reprobate.
These preachings and prayings nearly drove Harry out of his mind.
Confinement was bad enough; but confinement tempered by a course of
continual sermons, delivered mostly through the nose, was a terrible
infliction. At last the thought presented itself to him that he might
manage to effect his escape in the garb of the preacher. He thought the
details over and over in his mind, and at last determined at any rate to
attempt to carry them into execution.

One day he noticed, when the door opened for the entry of the preacher,
that a parade of unusual magnitude was being held in the drill yard,
some officer of importance having come down to inspect the Train Band.
There were but four men left in the guardroom and these were occupied in
gazing out of the window. The preacher came direct into the cell, as his
audience in the guardroom for once were not disposed to listen to him,
and shutting the door behind him, he addressed a few words of
exhortation to Harry, and then, closing his eyes, began a long prayer.
When he was fairly under way, Harry sprang upon him, grasping him by the
throat with both hands, and forced him back upon the bed. The little
preacher was too much surprised to offer the smallest resistance, and
Harry, who had drawn out the cords used in supporting the sacking of the
bed, bound him hand and foot, keeping, while he did so, the pillow
across his face, and his weight on the top of the pillow, thereby nearly
putting a stop to the preacher's prayers and exhortations for all time.
Having safely bound him, and finding that he did not struggle in the
least, Harry removed the pillow, and was horrified to see his prisoner
black in the face. He had, however, no time for regret or inquiry how
far the man had gone, and stuffing a handkerchief into his mouth, to
prevent his giving any alarm should he recover breath enough to do so,
Harry placed his high steeple hat upon his head, his Geneva bands round
his throat, and his long black mantle over his shoulders. He then opened
the door and walked quietly forth. The guards were too much occupied
with the proceedings in the parade ground to do more than glance round,
as the apparent preacher departed. Harry strode with a long and very
stiff step, and with his figure bolt upright, to the gate of the parade
ground, and then passing through the crowd who were standing there
gaping at the proceedings within, he issued forth a free man.

For awhile he walked at a brisk pace, and then, feeling secure from
pursuit, slackened his speed; keeping westward through the city, he
passed along the Strand and out into the country beyond. He wore his
beaver well down over his eyes, and walked with his head down as if
meditating deeply, in order to prevent any passers-by from observing the
youthfulness of his face. When he arrived at the village of Chelsea, he
saw, in front of a gentleman's house, a horse hitched up to a hook
placed there for that purpose. Conceiving that for a long journey four
legs are much more useful than two, and that when he got beyond the
confines of London he should attract less suspicion upon a horse than if
striding alone along the road, he took the liberty of mounting it and
riding off. When he had gone a short distance he heard loud shouts; but
thinking these in no way to concern him, he rode on the faster, and was
soon beyond the sound of the voices. He now took a northerly direction,
traveled through Kensington, and then keeping east of Acton, where he
knew that some Parliament troops were quartered, he rode for the village
of Harrow. He was aware that the Royalists had fallen back to Oxford,
and that the Parliament troops were at Reading. He therefore made to the
northwest, intending to circuit round and so reach Oxford. He did not
venture to go to an inn, for although, as a rule, the keepers of these
places were, being jovial men, in no way affected toward the Commons,
yet he feared meeting there persons who might question and detain him.
He obtained some provision at a small village shop, in which he saw a
buxom woman standing behind her counter. She appeared vastly surprised
when he entered and asked for a manchet of bread, for the contrast
between his ruddy countenance and his Puritan hat and bands was so
striking that they could not fail to be noticed. The good woman looked
indeed too astonished to be able to attend to Harry's request, and he
was obliged to say, "Mother, time presses, and I care not to be caught
loitering here."

Divining at once that he was acting a part, and probably endeavoring to
escape the pursuit of the Commons, the good woman at once served him
with bread and some slices of ham, and putting these in the wallets of
the saddle, he rode on.

The next morning, in riding through the village of Wickham, his career
was nearly arrested. Just as he passed a sergeant followed by three or
four Parliament soldiers came out from an inn, and seeing Harry riding
past, addressed him:

"Sir, will it please you to alight, and to offer up a few words of
exhortation and prayer?"

Harry muttered something about pressing business. But in his sudden
surprise he had not time to think of assuming either the nasal drone or
the scriptural words peculiar to these black-coated gentry. Struck by
his tone, the sergeant sprang forward and seized his bridle.

"Whom have we here?" he said; "a lad masquerading in the dress of a
preacher. This must be explained, young sir."

"Sergeant," Harry said, "I doubt not that thou art a good fellow, and
not one to get a lad in a scrape. I am the son of a London citizen; but
he and my mother are at present greatly more occupied with the state of
their souls than with the carrying on of their carnal business. Being
young, the constant offering up of prayers and exhortations has vexed me
almost to desperation, and yesterday, while the good preacher who
attends then was in the midst of the third hour of his discourse I stole
downstairs, and borrowing his hat and cloak, together with his horse,
determined to set out to join my uncle, who is a farmer down in
Gloucestershire, and where in sooth the companionship of his
daughters--girls of my own age--suits my disposition greatly better than
that of the excellent men with whom my father consorts."

The soldiers laughed, and the sergeant, who was not at heart a bad
fellow, said:

"I fear, my young sir, that your disposition is a godless one, and that
it would have been far better for you to have remained under the
ministration of the good man whose hat you are wearing than to have
sought the society of your pretty cousins. However, I do not know but
that in the unregenerate days of my own youth I might not have attempted
an escapade like yours. I trust," he continued, "you are not tainted
with the evil doctrines of the adherents of King Charles."

"In truth," Harry said, "I worry not my head with politics. I hear so
much of them that I am fairly sick of the subject, and have not yet
decided whether the Commons is composed of an assembly of men directly
inspired with power for the regeneration of mankind, or whether King
Charles be a demon in human shape. Methinks that when I grow old enough
to bear arms it will be time enough for me to make up my mind against
whom to use them. At present, a clothyard is the stick to which I am
most accustomed, and as plows and harrows are greatly more in accord
with my disposition, I hope that for a long time I shall not see the
interior of a shop again; and I trust that the quarrels which have
brought such trouble into this realm, and have well-nigh made my father
and mother distraught, will at least favor my sojourn in the country,
for I am sure that my father will not venture to traverse England for
the sake of bringing me back again."

"I am not sure," the sergeant said, "that my duty would not be to
arrest you and to send you back to London. But as, in truth, I have no
instructions to hinder travelers, I must even let you go."

With a merry farewell to the group, and a laugh far more in accordance
with his years than with the costume which he wore, Harry set spurs to
his horse and again rode forward.

He met with no further adventure on the road. When he found by inquiries
that he had passed the outposts of the Parliament forces, he joyfully
threw the hat, the bands, and cloak into a ditch, for experience had
taught him that, however useful as a passport they might be while still
within the lines of the troops of the Commons, they would be likely to
procure him but scant welcome when he entered those of the Royalists.
Round Oxford the royal army were encamped, and Harry speedily discovered
that his father was with his troop at his own place. Turning his head
again eastward, he rode to Abingdon, and quickly afterward was at the
hall.

The shout of welcome which the servitor who opened the door uttered when
he saw him speedily brought his father to the entrance, and Sir Henry
was overjoyed at seeing the son whom he believed to be in confinement in
London. Harry's tale was soon told, and the colonel roared with laughter
at the thought of his boy masquerading as a Puritan preacher.

"King Charles himself," he said, "might smile over your story, Harry;
and in faith it takes a great deal to call up a smile into his majesty's
face, which is, methinks a pity, for he would be more loved, and not
less respected, did he, by his appearance and manner, do something to
raise the spirits of those around him."

When once seated in the hall Harry inquired of his father what progress
had been made since he was taken prisoner, for he had heard nothing from
his guards.

"Things are as they were," his father said. "After our unfortunate
advance we fell back hither, and for six weeks nothing was done. A
fortnight since, on the 2d of January, a petition was brought by
deputies from the Common Council of London, asking the king to return to
the capital when all disturbance should be suppressed. King Charles,
however, knew not that these gentlemen had the power to carry out their
promises seeing that the seditious have the upper hand in the capital,
and answered them to that effect. His answer was, however, methinks, far
less conciliatory and prudent than it might have been, for it boots not
to stir up men's minds unnecessarily, and with a few affectionate words
the king might have strengthened his party in London. The result,
however, was to lead to a fierce debate, in which Pym and Lord
Manchester addressed the multitude, and stirred them up to indignation,
and I fear that prospects of peace are further away than ever. In other
respects there is good and bad news. Yorkshire and Cheshire, Devon and
Cornwall, have all declared for the crown; but upon the other hand, in
the east the prospects are most gloomy. There, the seven counties,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Herts, Lincoln, and Huntingdon, have
joined themselves into an association, and the king's followers dare not
lift their heads. At Lichfield, Lord Brook, a fierce opponent of bishops
and cathedrals, while besieging a party of Cavaliers who had taken
possession of the close, was shot in the eye and killed. These are the
only incidents that have taken place."

For some weeks no event of importance occurred. On the 22d of February
the queen, who had been absent on the Continent selling her jewels and
endeavoring to raise a force, landed at Burlington, with four ships,
having succeeded in evading the ships of war which the Commons had
dispatched to cut her off, under the command of Admiral Batten. That
night, however, the Parliament fleet arrived off the place, and opened
fire upon the ships and village. The queen was in a house near the
shore, and the balls struck in all directions round. She was forced to
get up, throw on a few clothes, and retire on foot to some distance from
the village to the shelter of a ditch, where she sat for two hours, the
balls sometimes striking dust over them, and singing round in all
directions. It was a question whether the small force which the queen
brought with her was not rather a hindrance than an assistance to the
royal cause, for the Earl of Newcastle, who had been sent to escort her
to York, was authorized by the king to raise men for the service,
without examining their consciences, that is to say, to receive
Catholics as well as Protestants. The Parliament took advantage of this
to style his army the Catholic Army, and this, and some tamperings with
the Papists in Ireland, increased the popular belief that the king
leaned toward Roman Catholicism, and thus heightened the feelings
against him, and embittered the religious as well as the political
quarrel.

Toward the end of March commissioners from the Parliament, under the
Earl of Northumberland, came to Oxford with propositions to treat. It is
questionable whether the offers of the Commons were sincere. But
Charles, by his vacillation and hesitation, by yielding one day and
retracting the next, gave them the opportunity of asserting, with some
show of reason, that he was wholly insincere, and could not be trusted;
and so the commission was recalled, and the war went on again.

On the 15th of April Parliament formally declared the negotiations to be
at an end, and on that day Essex marched with his army to the siege of
Reading. The place was fortified, and had a resolute garrison; but by
some gross oversight no provisions or stores had been collected, and
after an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the town, when the Royalist
forces failed to carry the bridge at Caversham, they fell back upon
Wallingford, and Reading surrendered. Meanwhile skirmishes were going on
all over the country. Sir William Waller was successful against the
Royalists in the south and west. In the north Lord Newcastle was opposed
to Fairfax, and the result was doubtful; while in Cornwall the Royalists
had gained a battle over the Parliament men under Lord Stamford.

Meanwhile, the king was endeavoring to create a party in the Parliament,
and Lady Aubigny was intrusted with the negotiations. The plot was,
however, discovered. Several members of Parliament were arrested, and
two executed by orders of the Parliament.

Early in June Colonel Furness and his troop were called into Oxford, as
it was considered probable that some expeditions would be undertaken,
and on the 17th of that month Prince Rupert formed up his horse and
sallied out against the outlying pickets and small troops of the
Parliament. Several of these he surprised and cut up, and on the morning
of the 19th reached Chalgrove Field, near Thame. Hampden was in command
of a detachment of Parliamentary troops in this neighborhood, and
sending word to Essex, who lay near, to come up to his assistance,
attacked Prince Rupert's force. His men, however, could not stand
against the charge of the Royalists. They were completely defeated, and
Hampden, one of the noblest characters of his age, was shot through the
shoulder. He managed to keep his horse, and ride across country to
Thame, where he hoped to obtain medical assistance. After six days of
pain he died there, and thus England lost the only man who could, in
the days that were to come, have moderated, and perhaps defeated, the
ambition of Cromwell.

Essex arrived upon the scene of battle a few minutes after the defeat of
Hampden's force, and Prince Rupert fell back, and crossing the Thames
returned to Oxford, having inflicted much damage upon the enemy.

Shortly after this event, one of the serving men rushed in to Harry with
the news that a strong band of Parliament horse were within three or
four miles of the place, and were approaching. Harry at once sent for
the steward, and a dozen men were summoned in all haste. On their
arrival they set to work to strip the hall of its most valued furniture.
The pictures were taken down from the walls, the silver and plate
tumbled into chests, the arms and armor worn by generations of the
Furnesses removed from the armory, the choicest articles of furniture of
a portable character put into carts, together with some twenty casks of
the choicest wine in the cellars, and in four hours only the heavier
furniture, the chairs and tables, buffets and heavy sideboards remained
in their places.

Just as the carts were filled news came that the enemy had ridden into
Abingdon. Night was now coming on, and the carts at once started with
their contents for distant farms, where the plate and wine were to be
buried in holes dug in copses, and other places little likely to be
searched by the Puritans. The pictures and furniture were stowed away in
lofts and covered deeply with hay.

Having seen the furniture sent off, Harry awaited the arrival of the
Parliament bands, which he doubted not would be dispatched by the
Puritans among the townspeople to the hall. The stables were already
empty except for Rollo, Harry's own horse. This he had at once, the
alarm being given, sent off to a farm a mile distant from the hall, and
with it its saddle, bridle, and his arms, a brace of rare pistols,
breast and back pieces, a steel cap with plumes, and his sword. It cost
him an effort to part with the last, for he now carried it habitually.
But he thought that it might be taken from him, and, moreover, he feared
that he might be driven into drawing it, when the consequences might be
serious, not only for himself, but for the mansion of which his father
had left him in charge.

At nine a servitor came in to say that a party of men were riding up the
drive. Harry seated himself in the colonel's armchair, and repeated to
himself the determination at which he had arrived of being perfectly
calm and collected, and of bearing himself with patience and dignity.
Presently he heard the clatter of horses' hoofs in the courtyard, and
two minutes later, the tramp of feet in the passage. The door opened,
and an officer entered, followed by five or six soldiers.

This man was one of the worst types of Roundhead officers. He was a
London draper, whose violent harangues had brought him into notice, and
secured for him a commission in the raw levies when they were first
raised. Harry rose as he entered.

"You are the son of the man who is master of this house?" the officer
said roughly.

"I am his son and representative," Harry said calmly.

"I hear that he is a malignant fighting in the ranks of King Charles."

"My father is a colonel in the army of his gracious majesty the king,"
Harry said.

"You are an insolent young dog!" the captain exclaimed. "We will teach
you manners," and rising from the seat into which he had thrown himself
on entering the hall, he struck Harry heavily in the face.

The boy staggered back against the wall; then with a bound he snatched
a sword from the hand of one of the troopers, and before the officer had
time to recoil or throw up his hands, he smote him with all his force
across the face. With a terrible cry the officer fell back, and Harry,
throwing down the sword, leaped through the open window into the garden
and dashed into the shrubberies, as half a dozen balls from the pistols
of the astonished troopers whizzed about his head.

For a few minutes he ran at the top of his speed, as he heard shouts and
pistol shots behind him. But he knew that in the darkness strangers
would have no chance whatever of overtaking him, and he slackened his
pace into a trot. As he ran he took himself to task for not having acted
up to his resolution. But the reflection that his father would not
disapprove of his having cut down the man who had struck him consoled
him, and he kept on his way to the farm where he had left his horse. In
other respects, he felt a wild delight at what had happened. There was
nothing for him now but to join the Royal army, and his father could
hardly object to his taking his place with the regiment.

"I wish I had fifty of them here," he thought to himself; "we would
surround the hall, and pay these traitors dearly. As for their captain,
I would hang him over the door with my own hands. The cowardly ruffian,
to strike an unarmed boy! At any rate I have spoiled his beauty for him,
for I pretty nearly cut his face in two, I shall know him by the scar if
I ever meet him in battle, and then we will finish the quarrel.

"I shall not be able to see out of my right eye in the morning," he
grumbled; "and shall be a nice figure when I ride into Oxford."

As he approached the farm he slackened his speed to a walk; and neared
the house very carefully, for he thought it possible that one of the
parties of the enemy might already have taken up his quarters there. The
silence that reigned, broken by the loud barking of dogs as he came
close, proved that no stranger had yet arrived, and he knocked loudly at
the door. Presently an upper window was opened, and a woman's voice
inquired who he was, and what he wanted.

"I am Harry Furness, Dame Arden," he said. "The Roundheads are at the
hall, and I have sliced their captain's face; so I must be away with all
speed. Please get the men up, and lose not a moment; I want my arms and
horse."

The farmer's wife lost no time in arousing the house, and in a very few
minutes all was ready. One man saddled the horse, while another buckled
on Harry's breast and back pieces; and with a hearty good-by, and amid
many prayers for his safety and speedy return with the king's troops,
Harry rode off into the darkness. For awhile he rode cautiously,
listening intently lest he might fall into the hands of some of the
Roundhead bands. But all was quiet, and after placing another mile or
two between himself and Abingdon, he concluded that he was safe, drew
Rollo's reins tighter, pressed him with his knees, and started at full
gallop for Oxford.




 

A MISSION OF STATE.


When Harry rode into Oxford with the news that the Roundheads had made a
raid as far as Abingdon, no time was lost in sounding to boot and
saddle, and in half an hour the Cavalier horse were trotting briskly in
that direction. They entered Abingdon unopposed, and found to their
disgust that the Roundheads had departed an hour after their arrival. A
party went up to Furness Hall, and found it also deserted. The
Roundheads, in fact, had made but a flying raid, had carried off one or
two of the leading Royalists in the town, and had, on their retirement,
been accompanied by several of the party favorable to the Commons, among
others, Master Rippinghall and the greater portion of his men, who had,
it was suspected, been already enrolled for the service of the
Parliament. Some of the Royalists would fain have sacked the house of
the wool-stapler; but Colonel Furness, who had accompanied the force
with his troop, opposed this vehemently.

"As long as we can," he said, "let private houses be respected. If the
Puritans commence, it will be time for us to retort. There are
gentlemen's mansions all over the country, many of them in the heart of
Roundhead neighborhoods, and if they had once an excuse in our
proceedings not one of these would be safe for a minute."

Leaving a strong force of horse in Abingdon, Prince Rupert returned to
Oxford, and Colonel Furness again settled down in his residence, his
troop dispersing to their farms until required, a small body only
remaining at Furness Hall as a guard, and in readiness to call the
others to arms if necessary. The colonel warmly approved of the steps
that Harry had taken to save the valuables, and determined that until
the war was at an end these should remain hidden, as it was probable
enough that the chances of the strife might again lead the Roundheads
thither.

"I hope, father," Harry Furness said the following day, "that you will
now permit me to join the troop. I am getting on for sixteen, and could
surely bear myself as a man in the fray."

"If the time should come, Harry, when the fortune of war may compel the
king to retire from Oxford--which I trust may never be--I would then
grant your request, for after your encounter with the officer who
commanded the Roundheads here, it would not be safe for you to remain
behind. But although you are too young to take part in the war, I may
find you employment. After a council that was held yesterday at Oxford,
I learned, from one in the king's secrets, that it was designed to send
a messenger to London with papers of importance, and to keep up the
communication with the king's friends in that city. There was some
debate as to who should be chosen. In London, at the present time, all
strangers are closely scrutinized. Every man is suspicious of his
neighbor, and it is difficult to find one of sufficient trust whose
person is unknown. Then I have thought that maybe you could well fulfill
this important mission. A boy would be unsuspected, where a man's every
movement would be watched. There is, of course, some danger attending
the mission, and sharpness and readiness will be needed. You have shown
that you possess these, by the manner in which you made your escape from
London, and methinks that, did you offer, your services would be
accepted. You would have, of course, to go in disguise, and to accept
any situation which might appear conformable to your character and add
to your safety."

Harry at once gladly assented to the proposal. He was at the age when
lads are most eager for adventure, and he thought that it would be great
fun to be living in London, watching the doings of the Commons, and, so
far as was in his power, endeavoring to thwart them. Accordingly in the
afternoon he rode over with Sir Henry to Oxford. They dismounted in the
courtyard of the building which served as the king's court, and
entering, Sir Henry left Harry in an antechamber, and, craving an
audience with his majesty, was at once ushered into the king's cabinet.
A few minutes later he returned, and motioned to Harry to follow him.
The latter did so, and the next moment found himself in the presence of
the king. The latter held out his hand for the boy to kiss, and Harry,
falling on one knee, and greatly abashed at the presence in which he
found himself, pressed his lips to King Charles' hand.

"I hear from your father, my trusty Sir Henry Furness, that you are
willing to adventure your life in our cause, and to go as our messenger
to London, and act there as our intermediary with our friends. You seem
young for so delicate a work; but your father has told me somewhat of
the manner in which you escaped from the hands of the traitors at
Westminster, and also how you bore yourself in the affair with the
rebels at his residence. It seems to me, then, that we must not judge
your wisdom by your years, and that we can safely confide our interests
in your hands. Your looks are frank and boyish, and will, therefore,
excite far less suspicion than that which would attend upon an older and
graver-looking personage. The letters will be prepared for you
to-morrow, and, believe me, should success finally crown our efforts
against these enemies of the crown, your loyalty and devotion will not
be forgotten by your king."

He again held out his hand to Harry, and the boy left the cabinet with
his heart burning with loyalty toward his monarch, and resolved that
life itself should be held cheap if it could be spent in the service of
so gracious and majestic a king.

The next morning a royal messenger brought out a packet of letters to
Furness Hall, and Harry, mounting with his father and the little body of
horse at the hall, rode toward London. His attire was that of a country
peasant boy. The letters were concealed in the hollow of a stout ashen
stick which he carried, and which had been slightly weighted with lead,
so that, should it be taken up by any but its owner, its lightness would
not attract attention. Sir Henry rode with him as far as it was prudent
to do toward the outposts of the Parliament troops. Then, bidding him a
tender farewell, and impressing upon him the necessity for the utmost
caution, both for his own sake and for that of the king, he left him.

It was not upon the highroad that they parted, but near a village some
little distance therefrom. In his pocket Harry had two or three pieces
of silver, and between the soles of his boots were sewn several gold
coins. These he did not anticipate having to use; but the necessity
might arise when such a deposit would prove of use. Harry walked quietly
through the village, where his appearance was unnoticed, and then along
the road toward Reading. He soon met a troop of Parliament horsemen; but
as he was sauntering along quietly, as if merely going from one village
to another, no attention whatever was paid to him, and he reached
Reading without the slightest difficulty. There he took up his abode for
the night at a small hostelry, mentioning to the host that his master
had wanted him to join the king's forces, but that he had no stomach for
fighting, and intended to get work in the town. The following morning he
again started, and proceeded as far as Windsor, where he slept. The next
day, walking through Hounslow and Brentford, he stopped for the night at
the village of Kensington, and the following morning entered the city.
Harry had never before been in the streets of London, for in his flight
from his prison he had at once issued into the country, and the bustle
and confusion which prevailed excited great surprise in his mind. Even
Oxford, busy as it was at the time, and full of the troops of the king
and of the noblemen and gentlemen who had rallied to his cause, was yet
quiet when compared with London. The booths along the main streets were
filled with goods, and at these the apprentices shouted loudly to all
passer-by, "What d'ye lack? What d'ye lack?" Here was a mercer
exhibiting dark cloths to a grave-looking citizen; there an armorer was
showing the temper of his wares to an officer. Citizens' wives were
shopping and gossiping; groups of men, in high steeple hats and dark
cloak, were moving along the streets. Pack horses carried goods from the
ships at the wharves below the bridge to the merchants, and Harry was
jostled hither and thither by the moving crowd. Ascending the hill of
Ludgate to the great cathedral of St. Paul's, he saw a crowd gathered
round a person on an elevated stand in the yard, and approaching to see
what was going on, found that a preacher was pouring forth anathemas
against the king and the Royal party, and inciting the citizens to throw
themselves heart and soul into the cause. Especially severe was he upon
waverers, who, he said, were worse than downright enemies, as, while the
one withstood the Parliament openly in fair fight, the others were
shifted to and fro with each breeze, and none could say whether they
were friends or enemies. Passing through the cathedral, where regular
services were no longer held, but where, in different corners, preachers
were holding forth against the king, and where groups of men strolled up
and down, talking of the troubles of the times, he issued at the eastern
door, and entering Cheapside, saw the sign of the merchant to whom he
had been directed.

This was Nicholas Fleming, a man of Dutch descent, and well spoken of
among his fellows. He dealt in silks and velvets from Genoa. His shop
presented less outward appearance than did those of his neighbors, the
goods being too rich and rare to be exposed to the weather, and he
himself dealing rather with smaller traders than with the general
public. The merchant--a grave-looking man--was sitting at his desk when
Harry entered. A clerk was in the shop, engaged in writing, and an
apprentice was rolling up a piece of silk. Harry removed his hat, and
went up to the merchant's table, and laying a letter upon it, said:

"I have come, sir, from Dame Marjory, my aunt, who was your honor's
nurse, with a letter from her, praying you to take me as an apprentice."

The merchant glanced for a moment at the boy. He was expecting a message
from the Royalist camp, and his keen wit at once led him to suspect that
the bearer stood before him, although his appearance in nowise justified
such a thought, for Harry had assumed with his peasant clothes a look of
stolid stupidity which certainly gave no warrant for the thought that a
keen spirit lay behind it. Without a word the merchant opened the
letter, which, in truth, contained nearly the same words which Harry had
spoken, but whose signature was sufficient to the merchant to indicate
that his suspicions were correct.

"Sit down," he said to the lad. "I am busy now; but will talk with you
anon."

Harry took his seat on a low stool, while the merchant continued his
writing as before, as if the incident were too unimportant to arrest his
attention for a moment. Harry amused himself by looking round the shop,
and was specially attracted by the movements of the apprentice, a
sharp-looking lad, rather younger than himself, and who, having heard
what had passed, seized every opportunity, when he was so placed that
neither the merchant nor his clerk could observe his face to make
grimaces at Harry, indicative of contempt and derision. Harry was sorely
tempted to laugh; but, with an effort, he kept his countenance, assuming
only a grim of wonder which greatly gratified Jacob, who thought that he
had obtained as companion a butt who would afford him infinite
amusement.

After the merchant had continued his writing for an hour, he laid down
his pen, and saying to Harry "Follow me; I will speak to Dame Alice, my
wife, concerning thee," left the shop and entered the inner portion of
the house, followed by Harry. The merchant led him into a sitting-room
on the floor above, where his wife, a comely dame, was occupied with her
needle.

"Dame," he said, "this is a new apprentice whom my nurse, Marjory, has
sent me. A promising-looking youth, is he not?"

His wife looked at him in surprise.

"I have never heard thee speak of thy nurse, Nicholas, and surely the
lad looks not apt to learning the mysteries of a trade like thine."

The merchant smiled gravely.

"He must be more apt than he looks, dame, or he would never have been
chosen for the service upon which he is engaged. Men do not send fools
to risk their lives; and I have been watching him for the last hour, and
have observed how he bore himself under the tricks of that jackanapes,
Jacob, and verily the wonder which I at first felt when he presented
himself to me has passed away, and what appeared to me at first sight a
strange imprudence, seems now to be a piece of wisdom. But enough of
riddles," he said, seeing that his wife's astonishment increased as he
went on. "This lad is a messenger from Oxford, and bears, I doubt not,
important documents. What is thy true name, boy?"

"I am Harry Furness, the son of Sir Henry Furness, one of the king's
officers," Harry said; "and my papers are concealed within this staff."

Thereupon he lifted his stick and showed that at the bottom a piece of
wood had been artfully fitted into a hollow, and then, by being rubbed
upon the ground, so worn as to appear part of a solid whole. Taking his
knife from his pocket, he cut off an inch from the lower end of the
stick, and then shook out on to the table a number of slips of paper
tightly rolled together.

"I will examine these at my leisure," the merchant said; "and now as to
thyself. What instructions have you?"

"I am told, sir, to take up my abode with you, if it so pleases you; to
assume the garb and habits of an apprentice; and, moreover, to do such
messages as you may give me, and which, perhaps, I may perform with less
risk of observation, and with more fidelity than any ordinary
messenger."

"The proposal is a good one," the trader said. "I am often puzzled how
to send notes to those of my neighbors with whom I am in
correspondence, for the lad Jacob is sharp--too sharp, indeed, for my
purpose, and might suspect the purport of his goings and comings. I
believe him to be faithful, though overapt to mischief. But in these
days one cares not to risk one's neck unless on a surety. The first
thing will be, then, to procure for thee a suit of clothes, suitable to
thy new position. Under the plea that at present work is but slack--for
indeed the troubles of the times have well-nigh ruined the trade in such
goods as mine, throwing it all into the hands of the smiths--I shall be
able to grant thee some license, and to allow thee to go about and see
the city and acquaint thyself with its ways. Master Jacob may feel,
perhaps, a little jealous; but this matters not. I somewhat misdoubt the
boy, though perhaps unjustly. But I know not how his opinions may go
toward matters politic. He believes me, I think, as do other men, to be
attached to the present state of things; but even did his thoughts jump
otherwise, he would not have opened his lips before me. It would be
well, therefore, for you to be cautious in the extreme with him, and to
find out of a verity what be his nature and disposition. Doubtless, in
time, he will unbosom to you and you may see whether he has any
suspicions, and how far he is to be trusted. He was recommended to me
by a friend at Poole, and I know not the opinions of his people. I will
come forth with you now and order the clothes without delay, and we will
return in time for dinner, which will be at twelve, of which time it now
lacks half an hour."

Putting on his high hat, the merchant sallied out with Harry into the
Cheap, and going to a clothier's was able to purchase ready-made
garments suitable to his new position as a 'prentice boy. Returning with
these, he bade the lad mount to the room which he was to share Jacob,
to change with all speed, and to come down to dinner, which was now
nearly ready.

The meal was to Harry a curious one. The merchant sat at one end of the
table, his wife at the other. The scrivener occupied a place on one
side, and his fellow-apprentice and himself on the other. The merchant
spoke to his wife on the troubles of the times in a grave, oracular
voice, which appeared to be intended chiefly for the edification of his
three assistants, who ate their dinner in silence, only saying a word or
two in answer to any question addressed to them. Harry, who was
accustomed to dine with his father, was somewhat nice in his ways of
eating. But, observing a sudden look of interest and suspicion upon the
face of the sharp boy beside him at his manner of eating, he, without
making so sudden a change as to be perceptible, gradually fell into the
way of eating of his companion, mentally blaming himself severely for
having for a moment forgotten his assumed part.

"I shall not need you this afternoon, Roger," the merchant said; "and
you can go out and view the sights of the city. Avoid getting into any
quarrels or broils, and especially observe the names writ up on the
corner of the houses, in order that you may learn the streets and so be
able to find your way about should I send you with messages or goods."

Harry spent the afternoon as directed, and was mightily amused and
entertained by the sights which he witnessed. Especially was he
interested in London Bridge, which, covered closely with houses,
stretched across the river, and at the great fleet of vessels which lay
moored to the wharves below. Here Harry spent the greater portion of the
afternoon, watching the numerous boats as they shot the bridge, and the
barges receiving merchandise from the vessels.

At five o'clock the shop was shut, and at six supper was served in the
same order as dinner had been. At eight they retired to bed.

"Well, Master Roger," said Jacob, when they were done, "and what is thy
father?"

"He farms a piece of land of his own," Harry said. "Sometimes I live
with him; but more often with my uncle, who is a trader in Bristol--a
man of some wealth, and much respected by the citizens."

"Ah! it is there that thou hast learnt thy tricks of eating," Jacob
said. "I wondered to see thee handle thy knife and fork so daintily, and
in a manner which assuredly smacked of the city rather than of the
farm."

"My uncle," Harry said, "is a particular man as to his habits, and as
many leading citizens of the town often take their meals at his house,
he was ever worrying me to behave, as he said, more like a Christian
than a hog. What a town is this London! What heaps of people, and what
wonderful sights!"

"Yes," the apprentice said carelessly. "But you have as yet seen
nothing. You should see the giant with eight heads, at the Guildhall."

"A giant with eight heads?" Henry exclaimed wonderingly. "Why, he have
five more than the giant whom my mother told me of when I was little,
that was killed by Jack, the Giant Killer. I must go and see him of a
surety.'"

"You must mind," the apprentice said; "for a boy is served up for him
every morning for breakfast."

"Now you are trying to fool me," Harry said. "My mother warned me that
the boys of London were wickedly disposed, and given to mock at
strangers. But I tell thee, Master Jacob, that I have a heavy fist, and
was considered a fighter in the village. Therefore, mind how thou triest
to fool me. Mother always said I was not such a fool as I looked."

"You may well be that," Jacob said, "and yet a very big fool. But at
present I do not know whether your folly is more than skin deep, and
methinks that the respectable trader, your uncle, has taught you more
than how to eat like a Christian."

Harry felt at once that in this sharp boy he had a critic far more
dangerous than any he was likely to meet elsewhere. Others would pass
him unnoticed; but his fellow-apprentice would criticise every act and
word, and he felt somewhat disquieted to find that he had fallen under
such supervision. It was now, he felt, all-important for him to discover
what were the real sentiments of the boy, and whether he was trustworthy
to his master, and to be relied upon to keep the secret which had fallen
into his possession.

"I have been," he said, "in the big church at the end of this street.
What a pother the preachers do surely keep up there. I should be sorely
worried to hear them long, and would rather thrash out a load of corn
than listen long to the clacking of their tongues."

"Thou wilt be sicker still of them before thou hast done with them. It
is one of the duties of us apprentices to listen to the teachers, and if
I had my way, we would have an apprentices' riot, and demand to be kept
to the terms of our indentures, which say nothing about preachers. What
is the way of thinking of this uncle of yours?"

"He is a prudent man," Roger said, "and says but little. For myself, I
care nothing either way, and cannot understand what they are making this
pother about. So far as I can see, folks only want to be quiet, and do
their work. But even in our village at home there is no quiet now. Some
are one way, some t'other. There are the Church folk, and the
meeting-house folk, and it is as much as they can do to keep themselves
from going at each other's throats. I hear so much about it that my
brain gets stupid with it all, and I hate Parliament and king worse than
the schoolmaster who used to whack me for never knowing the difference
between one letter and another."

"But you can read and write, I suppose?" Jacob said; "or you would be of
little use as an apprentice."

"Yes, I can read and write," Roger said; "but I cannot say that I love
these things. I doubt me that I am not fitter for the plow than for a
trade. But my Aunt Marjory was forever going on about my coming to
London, and entering the shop of Master Nicholas Fleming, and as it
seemed an easy thing to sell yards of silks and velvets, I did not stand
against her wishes, especially as she promised that if in a year's time
I did not like the life, she would ask Master Nicholas to cancel my
indentures, and let me go back again to the farm."

"Ah, well," Jacob said, "it is useful to have an aunt who has been nurse
to a city merchant. The life is not a bad one, though our master is
strict with all. But Dame Alice is a good housewife, and has a light
hand at confections, and when there are good things on the table she
does not, as do most of the wives of the traders, keep them for herself
and her husband, but lets us have a share also."

"I am fond of confections,", Harry said; "and my Aunt Marjory is famous
at them; and now, as I am very sleepy, I will go off. But methinks,
Jacob, that you take up hugely more than your share of the bed."

After a little grumbling on both sides the boys disposed themselves to
sleep, each wondering somewhat over the character of the other, and
determining to make a better acquaintance shortly.




 

A NARROW ESCAPE.


During the next few days Harry was kept hard at work delivering the
various minute documents which he had brought in the hollow of his
stick. Sometimes of an evening he attended his master to the houses
where he had taken such messages, and once or twice was called in to be
present at discussions, and asked to explain various matters connected
with the position of the king. During this time he saw but little of the
apprentice Jacob, except at his meals, and as the boy did not touch upon
his frequent absence, or make any allusion to political matters, when in
their bedroom alone at night, Harry hoped that his suspicions had been
allayed.

One morning, however, on waking up, he saw the boy sitting upright in
bed, staring fixedly at him.

"What is the matter; Jacob, and what are you doing?"

"I am wondering who and what you are!" the boy said.

"I am Roger, your fellow apprentice," Harry replied, laughing.

"I am not sure that you are Roger; I am not sure that you are an
apprentice," the boy said. "But if you were, that would not tell me who
you are. If you were merely Roger the apprentice, Dame Alice would not
pick out all the tit-bits at dinner, and put them on your plate, while I
and Master Hardwood have to put up with any scraps which may come. Nor
do I think that, even for the purpose of carrying his cloak, our master
would take you with him constantly of an evening. He seems mighty
anxious too, for you to learn your way about London. I do not remember
that he showed any such care as to my geographical knowledge. But, of
course, there is a mystery, and I want to get to the bottom of it, and
mean to do so if I can."

"Even supposing that there was a mystery," Harry said, "what good would
it do to you to learn it, and what use would you make of your
knowledge?"

"I do not know," the boy said carelessly. "But knowledge is power."

"You see," Harry said, "that supposing there were, as you say, a
mystery, the secret would not be mine to tell, and even were it so
before I told it, I should want to know whether you desired to know it
for the sake of aiding your master, if possible, or of doing him an
injury.

"I would do him no injury, assuredly," Jacob said. "Master Fleming is as
good a master as there is in London. I want to find out, because it is
my nature to find out. The mere fact that there is a mystery excites my
curiosity, and compels me to do all in my power to get to the bottom of
it. Methinks that if you have aught that you do not want known, it would
be better to take Jacob Plummer into your confidence. Many a man's head
has been lost before now because he did not know whom to trust."

"There is no question of losing heads in the matter," Harry said,
smiling.

"Well, you know best," Jacob replied, shrugging his shoulders; "but
heads do not seem very firmly on at present."

When he went out with Master Fleming that evening Harry related to him
the conversation which he had had with Jacob.

"What think you, Master Furness? Is this malapert boy to be trusted, or
not?"

"It were difficult to say, sir," Harry answered. "His suspicions are
surely roused, and as it seemed to me that his professions of affection
and duty toward yourself were earnest, methinks that you might enlist
him in your cause, and would find him serviceable hereafter, did you
allow me frankly to speak to him. He has friends among the apprentice
boys, and might, should he be mischievously inclined, set one to follow
us of a night, and learn whither you go; he might even now do much
mischief. I think that it is his nature to love plotting for its own
sake. He would rather plot on your side than against it; but if you will
not have him, he may go against you."

"I have a good mind to send him home to his friends," the merchant said.
"He can know nothing as yet."

"He might denounce me as a Royalist," Harry said; "and you for harboring
me. I will sound him again to-night, and see further into his
intentions. But methinks it would be best to trust him."

That night the conversation was again renewed.

"You see, Jacob," Harry said, "that it would be a serious matter,
supposing what you think to be true, to intrust you with the secret. I
know not whether you are disposed toward king or Parliament, and to put
the lives of many honorable gentlemen into the hands of one of whose
real disposition I know little would be but a fool's trick."

"You speak fairly, Roger," the boy said. "Indeed, What I said to you was
true. I trouble my head in no way as to the politics and squabbles of
the present day; but I mean to rise some day, and there is no better way
to rise than to be mixed up in a plot. It is true that the rise may be
to the gallows; but if one plays for high stakes, one must risk one's
purse. I love excitement, and believe that I am no fool. I can at least
be true to the side that I engage upon, and of the two, would rather
take that of the king than of the Parliament, because it seems to me
that there are more fools on his side than on the other, and therefore
more chance for a wise head to prosper."

Harry laughed.

"You have no small opinion of yourself, Master Jacob."

"No," the boy said; "I always found myself able to hold my own. My
father, who is a scrivener, predicted me that I should either come to
wealth or be hanged, and I am of the same opinion myself."

After further conversation next day with the merchant, Harry frankly
confided to Jacob that evening that he was the bearer of letters from
the king. Of their contents he said that he knew nothing; but had reason
to believe that another movement was on foot for bringing about the
overthrow of the party of Puritans who were in possession of the
government of London.

"I deemed that such was your errand," the boy said. "You played your
part well; but not well enough. You might have deceived grown-up people;
but you would hardly take in a boy of your own age. Now that you have
told me frankly, I will, if I can, do anything to aid. I care nothing
for the opinions of one side or the other; but as I have to go to the
cathedral three times on Sunday, and to sit each time for two hours
listening to the harangues of Master Ezekiel Proudfoot, I would gladly
join in anything which would be likely to end by silencing that fellow
and his gang. It is monstrous that, upon the only day in the week we
have to ourselves, we should be compelled to undergo the punishment of
listening to these long-winded divines."

When Harry was not engaged in taking notes, backward and forward,
between the merchant and those with whom he was negotiating, he was
occupied in the shop. There the merchant kept up appearances before the
scrivener and any customers who might come in, by instructing him in the
mysteries of his trade; by showing him the value of the different
velvets and silks; and by teaching him his private marks, by which, in
case of the absence of the merchant or his apprentice, he could state
the price of any article to a trader who might come in. Harry judged, by
the conversations which he had with his host, that the latter was not
sanguine as to the success of the negotiations which he was carrying on.

"If," he said, "the king could obtain one single victory, his friends
would raise their heads, and would assuredly be supported by the great
majority of the population, who wish only for peace; but so long as the
armies stood facing each other, and the Puritans are all powerful in the
Parliament and Council of the city, men are afraid to be the first to
move, not being sure how popular support would be given."

One evening after work was over Harry and Jacob walked together up the
Cheap, and took their place among a crowd listening to a preacher at
Paul's Cross. He was evidently a popular character, and a large number
of grave men, of the straitest Puritan appearance, were gathered round
him.

"I wish we could play some trick with these somber-looking knaves,"
Jacob whispered.

"Yes," Harry said; "I would give much to be able to do so; but at the
present moment I scarcely wish to draw attention upon myself."

"Let us get out of this, then," Jacob said, "if there is no fun to be
had. I am sick of these long-winded orations."

They turned to go, and as they made their way through the crowd, Harry
trod upon the toe of a small man in a high steeple hat and black coat.

"I beg your pardon," Harry said, as there burst from the lips of the
little man an exclamation which was somewhat less decorous than would
have been expected from a personage so gravely clad. The little man
stared Harry in the face, and uttered another exclamation, this time of
surprise. Harry, to his dismay, saw that the man with whom he had come
in contact was the preacher whom he had left gagged on the guardroom bed
at Westminster.

"A traitor! A spy!" shouted the preacher, at the top of his voice,
seizing Harry by the doublet. The latter shook himself free just as
Jacob, jumping in the air, brought his hand down with all his force on
the top of the steeple hat, wedging it over the eyes of the little man.
Before any further effort could be made to seize them, the two lads
dived through the crowd, and dashed down a lane leading toward the
river.

This sudden interruption to the service caused considerable excitement,
and the little preacher, on being extricated from his hat, furiously
proclaimed that the lad he had seized, dressed as an apprentice, was a
malignant, who had been taken prisoner at Brentford, and who had foully
ill-treated him in a cell in the guardroom at Finsbury. Instantly a
number of men set off in pursuit.

"What had we best do, Jacob?" Harry said, as he heard the clattering of
feet behind them.

"We had best jump into a boat," Jacob said, "and row for it. It is dark
now, and we shall soon be out of their sight."

At the bottom of the lane were some stairs, and at these a number of
boats. As it was late in the evening, and the night a foul one, the
watermen, not anticipating fares, had left, and the boys, leaping into a
boat, put out the sculls, and rowed into the stream, just as their
pursuers were heard coming down the lane.

"Which way shall we go?" Harry said.

"We had better shoot the bridge," Jacob replied. "Canst row well?"

"Yes," Harry said; "I have practiced at Abingdon with an oar."

"Then take the sculls," Jacob said, "and I will steer. It is a risky
matter going through the bridge, I tell you, at half tide. Sit steady,
whatever you do. Here they come in pursuit, Roger. Bend to the sculls,"
and in a couple of minutes they reached the bridge.

"Steady, steady," shouted Jacob, as the boat shot a fall, some eight
feet in depth, with the rapidity of an arrow. For a moment it was tossed
and whirled about in the seething waves below, and then, thanks to
Jacob's presence of mind and Harry's obedience to his orders, it emerged
safely into the smooth water below the bridge. Harry now gave up one of
the sculls to Jacob, and the two boys rowed hard down the stream.

"Will they follow, think you?" Harry said.

"I don't think," Jacob laughed, "that any of those black-coated gentry
will care for shooting the bridge. They will run down below, and take
boat there; and as there are sure to be hands waiting to carry fares out
to the ships in the pool, they will gain fast upon us when once they are
under way."

The wind was blowing briskly with them, and the tide running strong, and
at a great pace they passed the ships lying at anchor.

"There is the Tower," Jacob said; "with whose inside we may chance to
make acquaintance, if we are caught. Look," he said, "there is a boat
behind us, rowed by four oars! I fear that it is our pursuers."

"Had we not better land, and take our chance?" Harry said.

"We might have done so at first," Jacob said; "it is too late now. We
must row for it. Look," he continued, "there is a bark coming along
after the boat. She has got her sails up already, and the wind is
bringing her along grandly. She sails faster than they row, and if she
comes up to us before they overtake us, it may be that the captain will
take us in tow. These sea-dogs are always kindly."

The boat that the boys had seized was, fortunately, a very light and
fast one, while that in pursuit was large and heavy, and the four
watermen had to carry six sitters. Consequently, they gained but very
slowly upon the fugitives. Presently a shot from a pistol whizzed over
the boys' heads.

"I did not bargain for this, friend Roger," Jacob said. "My head is made
rather for plots and conspiracies than for withstanding the contact of
lead."

"Row away!" Harry said. "Here is the ship just alongside now."

As the vessel, which was a coaster, came along, the crew looked over the
side, their attention, being called by the sound of the pistol and the
shouts of those in chase.

"Throw us a rope, sir," Jacob shouted. "We are not malefactors, but have
been up to a boyish freak, and shall be heavily punished if we are
caught."

Again the pistol rang out behind, and one of the Sailors threw a rope to
the boys. It was caught, and in a minute the boat was gliding rapidly
along in the wake of the ship. She was then pulled up alongside, the
boys clambered on board, and the boat was sent adrift, The pursuers
continued the chase for a few minutes longer, but seeing the ship
gradually drawing away from them, they desisted, and turned in toward
shore.

"And who are you?" the captain of the brig said.

"We are apprentices, as you see," Jacob said. "We were listening to some
preaching at Paul's Cross. In trying to get out from the throng--being
at length weary of the long-winded talk of the preacher--we trod upon
the feet of a worthy divine. He, refusing to receive our apologies, took
the matter roughly, and seeing that the crowd of Puritans around were
going to treat us as malignant roisterers, we took the liberty of
driving the hat of our assailant over his eyes, and bolting. Assuredly,
had we been caught, we should have been put in the stocks and whipped,
even if worse pains and penalties had not befallen us, for ill-treatment
of one of those who are now the masters of London."

"It was a foolish freak," the captain said, "and in these days such
freaks are treated as crimes. It is well that I came along. What do you
purpose to do now?"

"We would fain be put ashore, sir, somewhere in Kent, so that we may
make our way back again. Our figures could not have been observed beyond
that we were apprentices, and we can enter the city quietly, without
fear of detection."

The wind dropped in the evening, and, the tide turning, the captain
brought to anchor. In the morning he sailed forward again. When he
neared Gravesend he saw a vessel lying in the stream.

"That is a Parliament ship," he said.

At that moment another vessel of about the same size as that in which
they were was passing her. She fired a gun, and the ship at once dropped
her sails and brought up.

"What can she be doing now, arresting the passage of ships on their way
down? If your crime had been a serious one, I should have thought that a
message must have been brought down in the night for her to search
vessels coming down stream for the persons of fugitives. What say you,
lads? Have you told me the truth?"

"We have told you the truth, sir," Harry said; "but not the whole truth.
The circumstances are exactly as my friend related them. But he omitted
to say that the preacher recognized in me one of a Cavalier family, and
that they may suspect that I was in London on business of the king's."

"Is that so?" the captain said. "In that case, your position is a
perilous one. It is clear that they do not know the name of the ship in
which you are embarked, or they would not have stopped the one which we
see far ahead. If they search the ship, they are sure to find you."

"Can you swim, Jacob?" Harry asked the other.

He nodded.

"There is a point," Harry said, "between this and the vessel of war, and
if you sail close to that you will for a minute or two be hidden from
the view of those on her deck. If you will take your ship close to that
corner we will jump overboard and swim on shore. If then your vessel is
stopped you can well say that you have no fugitives on board, and let
them search."

The captain thought the plan a good one, and at once the vessel's head
was steered over toward the side to which Harry had pointed. As they
neared the corner they for a minute lost sight of the hull of the
man-of-war, and the boys, with a word of thanks and farewell to the
captain, plunged over and swam to the bank, which was but some thirty
yards away. Climbing it, they lay down among the grass, and watched the
progress of the vessel. She, like the one before, was brought up by a
gun from the man-of-war, and a boat from the latter put out and remained
by her side for half an hour. Then they saw the boat return, the vessel
hoist her sails again, and go on her way.

"This is a nice position into which you have brought me, Master Roger,"
Jacob said. "My first step in taking part in plots and conspiracies does
not appear to me to lead to the end which I looked for. However, I am
sick of the shop, and shall be glad of a turn of freedom. Now let us
make our way across the marshes to the high land. It is but twenty miles
to walk to London, if that be really your intent."

"I shall not return to London myself," Harry said; "but shall make my
way back to Oxford. It would be dangerous now for me to appear, and I
doubt not that a sharp hue and cry will be kept up. In your case it is
different, for as you have been long an apprentice, and as your face
will be entirely unknown to any of them, there will be little chance of
your being detected."

"I would much rather go with you to Oxford," the lad said. "I am weary
of velvets and silks, and though I do not know that wars and battles
will be more to my taste, I would fain try them also. You are a
gentleman, and high in the trust of the king and those around him. If
you will take me with you as your servant I will be a faithful knave to
you, and doubt not that as you profit by your advantages, some of the
good will fall to my share also."

"In faith," Harry said, "I should hardly like you to be my servant,
Jacob, although I have no other office to bestow at present. But if you
come with me you shall be rather in the light of a major-domo, though I
have no establishment of which you can be the head. In these days,
however, the distinctions of master and servant are less broad than
before, and in the field we shall be companions rather than master and
follower. So, if you like to cast in your fortunes with mine, here is my
hand on it. You have already proved your friendship to me as well as
your quickness and courage, and believe me, you will not find me or my
father ungrateful. But for you, I should now be in the cells, and your
old master in no slight danger of finding himself in prison, to say
nothing of the upset of the negotiations for which I came to London.
Therefore, you have deserved well, not only of me, but of the king, and
the adventure may not turn out so badly as it has begun. We had best
strike south, and go round by Tunbridge, and thence keeping west, into
Berkshire, and so to Oxford. In this way we shall miss the Parliament
men lying round London, and those facing the Royalists between Reading
and Oxford."

This order was carried out. The lads met with but few questioners, and
replying always that they were London apprentices upon their way home to
visit their friends for a short time, passed unsuspected. At first the
want of funds had troubled them, for Harry had forgotten the money sewn
up in his shoe. But presently, remembering this, and taking two gold
pieces out of their hiding-place, they went merrily along the road and
in five days from starting arrived at Oxford.




 

IN A HOT PLACE.


Making inquiries, Harry found that his father was living at a house in
the college of Brazenose, and thither he made his way. Not a little
surprised was the trooper, who was on guard before the door, to
recognize his master's son in one of the two lads who, in the clothes of
apprentices shrunk with water and stained with mud and travel, presented
themselves before him. Harry ascended at once to Sir Henry's room, and
the latter was delighted to see him again, for he had often feared that
be had acted rashly in sending him to London. Harry briefly told his
adventures, and introduced his friend Jacob to his father.

Sir Henry immediately sent for a clothier, and Harry was again made
presentable; while a suit of serviceable clothes adapted to the position
of a young gentleman of moderate means was obtained for Jacob. Then,
accompanied by his son, Sir Henry went to the king's chambers, and
informed his majesty of all that had happened. As, from the reports
which had reached the king of the temper of the people of London, he had
but small hope that anything would come of the attempt that was being
made, he felt but little disappointed at hearing of the sudden return of
his emissary. Harry was again asked in, and his majesty in a few words
expressed to him his satisfaction at the zeal and prudence which he had
shown, and at his safe return to court.

On leaving the king Harry awaited anxiously what his father would
determine concerning his future, and was delighted when Sir Henry said,
"It is now a year once these troubles began, Harry, and you have so far
embarked upon them, that I fear you would find it difficult to return to
your studies. You have proved yourself possessed of qualities which will
enable you to make your way in the world, and I therefore think the time
has come when you can take your place in the ranks. I shall ask of the
king a commission for you as captain in my regiment, and as one of my
officers has been killed you will take his place, and will have the
command of a troop."

Harry was delighted at this intimation; and the following day received
the king's commission.

A few days afterward he had again to ride over to Furness Hall, which
was now shut up, to collect some rents, and as he returned through
Abingdon he saw Lucy Rippinghall walking in the streets. Rather proud of
his attire as a young cavalier in full arms, Harry dismounted and
courteously saluted her.

"I should hardly have known you, Master Furness," she said. "You look so
fierce in your iron harness, and so gay with your plumes and ribands. My
brother would be glad to see you. My father as you know, is away. Will
you not come in for a few minutes?"

Harry, after a few moments' hesitation, assented. He longed to see his
old friend, and as the latter was still residing at Abingdon, while he
himself had already made his mark in the royal cause, he did not fear
that any misconstruction could be placed upon his visit to the Puritan's
abode. Herbert received him with a glad smile of welcome.

"Ah, Harry," he said, "so you have fairly taken to man's estate. Of
course, I think you have done wrong; but we need not argue on that now.
I am glad indeed to see you. Lucy," he said, "let supper be served at
once."

It was a pleasant meal, and the old friends chatted of their schooldays
and boyish pastimes, no allusion being made to the events of the day,
save that Herbert said, "I suppose that you know that my father is now a
captain in the force of the Commons, and that I am doing my best to keep
his business going during his absence."

"I had heard as much," Harry answered. "It is a heavy weight to be
placed on your shoulders, Herbert."

"Yes," he said, "I am growing learned in wools, and happily the business
is not falling off in my hands."

It was characteristic of the civil war in England that during the whole
time of its existence the affairs of the country went on as usual.
Business was conducted, life and property were safe, and the laws were
enforced just as before. The judges went their circuits undisturbed by
the turmoil of the times, acting under the authority alike of the Great
Seals of the King and Parliament. Thus evildoers were repressed, crime
put down, and the laws of the land administered just as usual, and as if
no hostile armies were marching and fighting on the fair fields of
England. In most countries during such troubled times, all laws have
been at an end, bands of robbers and disbanded soldiers have pillaged
and ruined the country, person and property alike have been unsafe,
private broils and enmities have broken forth, and each man has carried
his life in his hand. Thus, even in Abingdon, standing as it did halfway
between the stronghold of the crown at Oxford, and the Parliament army
at Reading, things remained quiet and tranquil. Its fairs and markets
were held as usual, and the course of business went on unchecked.

On his return to Oxford Harry learned that the king, with a portion of
the army, was to set out at once for Gloucester, to compel that city,
which had declared for the Commons, to open its gates. With a force of
thirteen thousand men the king moved upon Gloucester. When he arrived
outside its walls, on the 10th of August, he sent a summons to the town
to surrender, offering pardon to the inhabitants, and demanding an
answer within two hours. Clarendon has described how the answer was
returned. "Within less than the time described, together with a
trumpeter, returned two citizens from the town with lean, pale, sharp,
and bad visages, indeed, faces so strange and unusual, and in such a
garb and posture, that at once made the most severe countenances merry,
and the most cheerful heart sad, for it was impossible such ambassadors
could bring less than a defiance. The men, without any circumstance of
duty or good manners, in a pert, shrill, undismayed accent, said that
they brought an answer from the godly city of Gloucester to the king,
and were so ready to give insolent and seditious answers to any
questions, as if their business were chiefly to provoke the king to
violate his own safe-conduct." The answers which these strange
messengers brought was that the inhabitants and soldiers kept the city
for the use of his majesty, but conceived themselves "only bound to obey
the commands of his majesty signified by both houses of Parliament."
Setting fire to the houses outside their walls, the men of Gloucester
prepared for a resolute resistance. The walls were strong and well
defended, and the king did not possess artillery sufficient to make
breaches therein, and dreading the great loss which an assault upon the
walls would inflict upon his army, he determined to starve the city into
submission. The inhabitants, although reduced to sore straits, yet
relying upon assistance coming to them, held out, and their hopes were
not disappointed, as Essex, at the head of a great army, was sent from
London to relieve the place. Upon his approach, the king and his
councilors, deciding that a battle could not be fought with advantage,
drew off from the town, and gave up the siege.

Both armies now moved in the direction of London; but Prince Rupert,
hearing that a small body of Parliament horse were besieging the house
of Sir James Strangford, an adherent of the crown, took with him fifty
horse, and rode away to raise the siege, being ever fond of dashing
exploits in the fashion of the knights of old. The body which he chose
to accompany him was the troop commanded by Harry Furness, whose gayety
of manner and lightness of heart had rendered him a favorite with the
prince. The besieged house was situated near Hereford; and at the end of
a long day's march Prince Rupert, coming in sight of the Roundheads,
charged them with such fury that they were overthrown with scarce any
resistance, and fled in all directions. Having effected his object, the
prince now rode to Worcester, where he slept, and thence by a long day's
march to a village where he again halted for the night.

An hour after his arrival, a messenger came in from Lady Sidmouth, the
wife of Sir Henry Sidmouth, asking him to ride over and take up his
abode for the night at her house. Bidding Harry accompany him, the
prince rode off, leaving the troop under the charge of Harry's
lieutenant, Jacob, who had proved himself an active soldier, and had
been appointed to that rank at Gloucester. The house was a massive
structure of the reign of Henry VIII.; but being built at a time when
the castellated abodes were going out of fashion, was not capable of
standing a siege, and had not indeed been put in any posture of defense.
Sir Henry was with the king, and only a few retainers remained in the
house. Prince Rupert was received at the entrance by Lady Sidmouth, who
had at her side her daughter, a girl of fourteen, whom Harry thought the
most beautiful creature he had ever seen. The prince alighted, and
doffing his broad plumed hat, kissed the lady's hand, and conducted her
into the house again, Harry doing the same to her daughter.

"You must pardon a rough reception," the lady said to the prince. "Had I
had notice of your coming, I would have endeavored to receive you in a
manner more befitting; but hearing from one of my retainers, who
happened to be in the village when you arrived, of your coming, I
thought that the accommodation--poor as it is--would be better than that
which you could obtain there."

Prince Rupert replied gayly, and in a few minutes they were seated at
supper. The conversation was lightly kept up, when suddenly a tremendous
crash was heard, shouts of alarm were raised, and a retainer rushed into
the hall, saying that the place was attacked by a force of Roundheads.

"Defense is hopeless," the lady said, as Prince Rupert and Harry drew
their swords. "There are but five or six old men here, and the door
appears to be already yielding. There is a secret chamber here where you
can defy their search."

Prince Rupert, dreading above all things to be taken prisoner, and
seeing that resistance would be, as their hostess said, vain, followed
her into an adjoining room hung with arras. Lifting this, she showed a
large stone. Beneath it, on the floor was a tile, in no way differing
from the others. She pressed it, and the stone, which was but slight,
turned on a hinge, and disclosed an iron door. This she opened with a
spring, showing a small room within, with a ladder leading to another
above.

"Mount that," she said. "You will find in the chamber above a large
stone. Pull the ladder up with you and lower the stone, which exactly
fits into the opening. Even should they discover this chamber, they will
not suspect that another lies above it."

Prince Rupert, taking a light from her hands, hastily mounted, followed
by Harry, and pulled the steps after him, just as they heard the iron
door close. It needed the united strength of the prince and Harry to
lift the stone, which was a large one, with an iron ring in the center,
and to place it in the cavity. Having done this, they looked round. The
room was about eight feet long by six wide, and lighted by a long narrow
loophole extending from the ground to the roof. They deemed from its
appearance that it was built in one of the turrets of the building.

"That was a narrow escape, Master Harry," the prince said. "It would
have been right bad news for my royal uncle if I had been caught here
like a rat in a trap. I wonder we heard nothing of a Roundhead force in
this neighborhood. I suppose that they must have been stationed at some
place further north, and that the news of our passing reached them. I
trust that they have no suspicion that we are in the house; but I fear,
from this sudden attack upon an undefended building, that some spy from
the village must have taken word to them."

Lady Sidmouth had just time to return to the hall when the doors gave
way, and a body of Roundheads burst into the room. They had drawn swords
in their hands, and evidently expected an attack. They looked round with
surprise at seeing only Lady Sidmouth and her daughter.

"Where is the malignant Rupert?" the leader exclaimed. "We have sure
news that he rode, attended by an officer only, hither, and that he was
seen to enter your house."

"If you want Prince Rupert, you must find him," the lady said calmly.
"I say not that he has not been here; but I tell you that he is now
beyond your reach."

"He has not escaped," the officer said, "for the house is surrounded.
Now, madam, I insist upon your telling me where you have hidden him."

"I have already told you, sir, that he is beyond your reach, and nothing
that you can do will wring any further explanation from me."

The officer hesitated. For a moment he advanced a step toward her, with
a menacing gesture. But, heated as the passions of men were, no violence
was done to women, and with a fierce exclamation he ordered his troopers
to search the house. For a quarter of an hour they ransacked it high and
low, overturned every article of furniture, pulling down the arras, and
tapping the walls with the hilts of their swords.

"Take these two ladies away," he said to his lieutenant, "and ride with
them at once to Storton. They will have to answer for having harbored
the prince."

The ladies were immediately taken off, placed on pillions behind two
troopers, and carried away to Storton. In the meantime the search went
on, and presently the hollow sound given by the slab in the wall was
noticed. The spring could not be discovered, but crowbars and hammers
being brought, the slab of stone was presently shivered. The discovery
of the iron door behind it further heightened their suspicion that the
place of concealment was found. The door, after a prolonged resistance,
was battered in. But the Roundheads were filled with fury, on entering,
to discover only a small, bare cell, with no signs of occupation
whatever. The search was now prolonged in other directions; but,
becoming convinced that it was useless, and that the place of
concealment was too cunningly devised to admit of discovery, the
captain ordered the furniture to be piled together, and setting light to
it and the arras in several places, withdrew his men from the house,
saying that if a rat would not come out of his hole, he must be smoked
in it.

The prince and Harry from their place of concealment had heard the sound
of blows against the doors below.

"They have found the way we have gone," the prince said, "but I think
not that their scent is keen enough to trace us up here. If they do so,
we will sell our lives dearly, for I will not be taken prisoner, and
sooner or later our troop will hear of the Roundheads' attack, and will
come to our rescue."

They heard the fall of the iron door, and the exclamations and cries
with which the Roundheads broke into the room below. Then faintly they
heard the sound of voices, and muffled knocks, as they tried the walls.
Then all was silent again.

"The hounds are thrown off the scent," the prince said. "It will need a
clever huntsman to put them on it. What will they do next, I wonder?"

Some time passed, and then Harry exclaimed:

"I perceive a smell of something burning, your royal highness."

"Peste! methinks I do also," the prince said. "I had not thought of
that. If these rascals have set fire to the place we shall be roasted
alive here."

A slight wreath of smoke was seen curling up through the crevice of the
tightly-fitting stone.

"We will leap out, and die sword in hand," the prince said; and seizing
the ring, he and Harry pulled at it. Ere they raised the stone an inch,
a volume of dense smoke poured up, and they at once dropped it into its
place again, feeling that their retreat was cut off. The prince put his
sword in its scabbard.

"We must die, my lad," he said. "A strange death, too, to be roasted in
a trap. But after all, whether by that or the thrust of a Roundhead
sword makes little difference in the end. I would fain have fallen in
the field, though."

"Perhaps," Harry suggested, "the fire may not reach us here. The walls
are very thick, and the chamber below is empty."

The prince shook his head.

"The heat of the fire in a house like this will crack stone walls," he
said.

He then took off his cloak and threw it over the stone, dressing it down
tightly to prevent the smoke from curling in. Through the loophole they
could now hear a roar, and crackling sounds, and a sudden glow lit up
the country.

"The flames are bursting through the windows," Harry said. "They will
bring our troop down ere long."

"The troop will do us no good," Prince Rupert replied. "All the king's
army could not rescue us. But at least it would be a satisfaction before
we die to see these crop-eared knaves defeated."

Minute after minute passed, and a broad glare of light illumined the
whole country round. Through the slit they could see the Roundheads
keeping guard round the house in readiness to cut off any one who might
seek to make his escape, while at a short distance off they had drawn up
the main body of the force. Presently, coming along the road at a rapid
trot, they saw a body of horse.

"There are our men," the prince exclaimed.

The Roundheads had seen them too. A trumpet was sounded, and the men on
guard round the house leaped to their horses, and joined the main body,
just as the Cavaliers charged upon them. The Roundheads fought stoutly;
but the charge of the Cavaliers was irresistible. Furious at the sight
of the house in flames, and ignorant of the fate which had befallen
their prince and their master's son, they burst upon the Roundheads with
a force which the latter were unable to withstand. For four or five
minutes the fight continued, and then such of the Roundheads as were
able clapped spurs to their horses and galloped off, hotly pursued by
the Cavaliers. The pursuit was a short one. Several of the Cavaliers
were gathered at the spot where the conflict had taken place, and were,
apparently, questioning a wounded man. Then the trumpeter who was with
them sounded the recall, and in a few minutes the Royalist troops came
riding back. They could see Jacob pointing to the burning building and
gesticulating with his arms. Then a party dashed up to the house, and
were lost to sight.

The prince and Harry both shouted at the top of their voices, but the
roar of the flames and the crash of falling beams deadened the sound.
The heat had by this time become intense. They had gradually divested
themselves of their clothing, and were bathed in perspiration.

"This heat is terrific," Prince Rupert said. "I did not think the human
frame could stand so great a heat. Methinks that water would boil were
it placed here."

This was indeed the case--the human frame, as is now well known, being
capable of sustaining a heat considerably above that of boiling water.
The walls were now so hot that the hand could not be borne upon them for
an instant.

"My feet are burning!" the prince exclaimed, "Reach down that ladder
from the wall."

They laid the ladder on the ground and stood upon it, thus avoiding any
contact with the hot stone.

"If this goes on," Prince Rupert said, with a laugh; "there will be
nothing but our swords left. We are melting away fast, like candles
before a fire. Truly I do not think that there was so much water in a
man as has floated down from me during the last half-hour."

Harry was so placed that he could command a sight through the loophole,
and he exclaimed, "They are riding away!"

This was indeed the case. The whole building was now one vast furnace,
and having from the first no hope that their friends, if there, could
have survived, they had, hearing that Lady Sidmouth and her daughter had
been taken to Storton, determined to ride thither to take them from the
hands of the Roundheads, and to learn from them the fate of their
leaders.

Another two hours passed. The heat was still tremendous, but they could
not feel that it was increasing. Once or twice they heard terrific
crashes, as portions of the wall fell. They would long since have been
roasted, were it not for the cool air which flowed in through the long
loophole, and keeping up a circulation in the chamber, lowered the
temperature of the air within it. At the end of the two hours Harry gave
a shout.

"They are coming back."

The light had now sunk to a quiet red glow, so that beyond the fact that
a party was approaching, nothing could be seen. They rode, however,
directly toward the turret, and then, when they halted, Harry saw the
figures of two ladies who were pointing toward the loophole. Harry now
stepped from the ladder on to the door and shouted at the top of his
voice through the loophole. The reply came back in a joyous shout.

"We are being roasted alive," Harry cried. "Get ladders as quickly as
possible, with crowbars, and break down the wall."

Men were seen to ride off in several directions instantly, and for the
first time a ray of hope illumined, the minds of the prince and Harry
that they might be saved. Half an hour later long ladders tied together
were placed against the wall, and Jacob speedily made his appearance at
the loophole.

"All access is impossible from the other side," he said, "for the place
where the house stood is a red-hot furnace, Most of the walls have
fallen. We had no hope of finding you alive."

"We are roasting slowly," Harry cried. "In Heaven's name bring us some
water."

Soon a bottle of water was passed in through the loophole, and then
three or four ladders being placed in position, the men outside began
with crowbars and pickaxes to enlarge the loophole sufficiently for the
prisoners to escape. It took three hours' hard work, at the end of which
time the aperture was sufficiently wide to allow them to emerge, and
utterly exhausted and feeling, as the prince said, "baked to a turn,"
they made their way down the ladder, being helped on either side by the
men, for they themselves were too exhausted to maintain their feet.




 

THE DEFENSE OF AN OUTPOST.


The effect of the fresh air and of cordials poured down their throats
soon restored the vigor to Prince Rupert and Harry Furness. They were
still weak, for the great effort which nature had made to resist the
force of the heat during those long hours had taxed their constitutions
to the utmost.

Lady Sidmouth was rejoiced indeed to find them alive, for she had made
sure that they were lost. It was not until she had been placed in a room
strongly barred, and under a guard at Storton, that she perceived the
light arising from her residence, and guessed that the men of the
Commons, unable to find the hiding-place of Prince Rupert, had set it on
fire. Then she had knocked loudly at the door; but the sentry had given
no answer either to that or to her entreaties for a hearing. She soon,
indeed, desisted from her efforts, for the fire which blazed up speedily
convinced her that all hope was gone. When Jacob and the Royalists
arrived, driving out the small remnant of the Roundheads who remained in
the village, he had found Lady Sidmouth and her daughter bathed in
tears, under the belief that their guests had perished in the old house
that they loved so well. It was with no hope that they had mounted on
the instant, and ridden at full gallop to the castle, and it was not
until they saw that that wall was still standing that even the slightest
hope entered their minds. Even then it appeared incredible that any one
could be alive, and the shout from the loophole had surprised almost as
much as it had delighted them.

In the course of three or four hours, refreshed and strengthened by a
hearty breakfast and draughts of burgundy, the prince and Harry mounted
their horses. Lady Sidmouth determined to remain for a few days at one
of her tenant's houses, and then to go quietly on to Oxford--for by this
time the main army of Essex was rapidly moving east, and the country
would soon be secure for her passage. The prince and Harry rode at full
speed to rejoin the army. That night, by riding late, they reached it.
They found that Essex had, in his retreat, surprised Cirencester and had
passed Farringdon.

The prince, with five thousand horse, started, and marching with great
rapidity, got between Reading and the enemy, and, near Newbury, fell
upon the Parliament horse. For several hours sharp skirmishing went on,
and Essex was forced to halt his army at Hungerford. This gave time for
the king, who was marching at the head of his infantry, to come up. The
royal army occupied Newbury, and by the position they had taken up, were
now between the Roundheads and London.

On the morning of the 20th of September the outpost of each force became
engaged, and the battle soon raged along the whole line. It was to some
extent a repetition of the battle of Edgehill. Prince Rupert, with his
Cavaliers, swept away the horse of the enemy; but the pikemen of London,
who now first were tried in combat, forced back the infantry of the
king. Prince Rupert, returning from the pursuit, charged them with all
his cavalry; but so sharply did they shoot, and so steadily did the line
of pikes hold together, that the horse could make no impression upon
them.

The night fell upon an undecided battle, and the next morning the
Roundheads, as at Edgehill, drew off from the field, leaving to the
Royalists the honor of a nominal success, a success, however, which was
in both cases tantamount to a repulse.

Three leading men upon the king's side fell--Lords Falkland, Carnarvon,
and Sunderland. The former, one of the finest characters of the times,
may be said to have thrown away his life. He was utterly weary of the
terrible dissensions and war in which England was plunged. He saw the
bitterness increasing on both sides daily--the hopes of peace growing
less and less; and as he had left the Parliamentary party, because he
saw that their ambition was boundless, and that they purposed to set up
a despotic tyranny, so he must have bitterly grieved at seeing upon the
side of the king a duplicity beyond all bounds, and want of faith which
seemed to forbid all hope of a satisfactory issue. Thus, then, when the
day of Newbury came, Falkland, whose duties in nowise led him into the
fight, charged recklessly and found the death which there can be little
doubt he sought.

Although the Cavaliers claimed Newbury as a great victory, instead of
advancing upon London they fell back as usual to Oxford.

During the skirmishes Harry had an opportunity of doing a service to an
old friend. The Parliament horse, although valiant and better trained
than that of the Royalists, were yet unable to withstand the impetuosity
with which the latter always attacked, the men seeming, indeed, to be
seized with a veritable panic at the sight of the gay plumes of Rupert's
gentlemen. In a fierce skirmish between Harry's troop and a party of
Parliament horse of about equal strength, the latter were defeated, and
Harry, returning with the main body, found a Puritan officer dismounted,
with his back against a tree, defending himself from the attacks of
three of his men. Harry rode hastily up and demanded his surrender. The
officer looked up, and to his surprise Harry saw his friend Herbert.

"I am your prisoner, Harry," Herbert said, as he lowered the point of
his sword.

"Not at all!" Harry exclaimed. "It would indeed be a strange thing,
Herbert, were I to make you a prisoner. I thought you settled at
Abingdon?"

Ordering one of his troopers to catch a riderless horse which was
galloping near, he spoke for a moment or two with his friend, and then,
as the horse was brought up, he told him to mount and ride.

"But you may get into trouble for releasing me," Herbert said.

"I care not if I do," Harry replied. "But you need not be uneasy about
me, for Prince Rupert will stand my friend, and hold me clear of any
complaint that may be made. I will ride forward with you a little, till
you can join your friends."

As Harry rode on by the side of Herbert a Royalist officer, one Sir
Ralph Willoughby, dashed up.

"What means this?" he exclaimed. "Do I see an officer of his majesty
riding with one of the Roundheads? This is treason and treachery!"

"I will answer to the king, if need be," Harry said, "for my conduct. I
am not under your orders, Sir Ralph, and shall use my discretion in this
matter. This gentleman is as a brother to me."

"And I would cut down my brother," Sir Ralph said furiously, "if I found
him in the ranks of the enemy!"

"Then, sir, we differ," Harry replied, "for that would not I. There are
your friends," he said to Herbert, pointing to a body of Roundheads at a
short distance, "Give me your word, however, that you will not draw
sword again to-day."

Herbert readily gave the required promise, and riding off, was soon
with his friends. Sir Ralph and Harry came to high words after he had
left; and the matter might then and there have been decided by the
sword, had not a party of Roundheads, seeing two cavalry officers so
near to them, charged down, and compelled them to ride for their lives.

The following day Sir Ralph reported the circumstance to the general,
and he to Prince Rupert. The prince laughed at the charge.

"Harry Furness," he said, "is as loyal a gentleman as draws sword in our
ranks, and as he and I have been well-nigh roasted together, it were
vain indeed that any complaint were made to me touching his honor. I
will speak to him, however, and doubt not that his explanation will be
satisfactory."

The prince accordingly spoke to Harry, who explained the circumstances
of his relations with the young Roundhead.

"Had he been a great captain, sir," Harry said, "I might have deemed it
my duty to hold him in durance, however near his relationship to myself.
But as a few weeks since he was but a schoolboy, methought that the
addition of his sword to the Roundhead cause would make no great
difference in our chances of victory that afternoon. Moreover, I had
received his pledge that he would not draw sword again in the battle."

As even yet, although the bitterness was quickly increasing, it was far
from having reached that point which it subsequently attained, and
prisoners on both sides were treated with respect, no more was said
regarding Harry's conduct in allowing his friend to escape. But from
that moment, between himself and Sir Ralph Willoughby there grew up a
strong feeling of animosity, which only needed some fitting pretext to
break out.

It was, indeed, an unfortunate point in the royal cause, that there was
very far from being unity among those who fought side by side. There
were intrigues and jealousies. There were the king's men, who would have
supported his majesty in all lengths to which he might have gone, and
who were ever advising him to resist all attempts at pacification, and
to be content with nothing less than a complete defeat of his enemies.
Upon the other hand, there were the grave, serious men, who had drawn
the sword with intense reluctance, and who desired nothing so much as
peace--a peace which would secure alike the rights of the crown and the
rights of the people.

They were shocked, too, by the riotous and profligate ways of some of
the wilder spirits, and deemed that their cause was sullied by the
reckless conduct and wild ways of many of their party. Sir Henry Furness
belonged to this section of the king's adherents, and Harry, who had
naturally imbibed his father's opinions, held himself a good deal aloof
from the wild young spirits of the king's party.

Skirmishes took place daily between the cavalry outposts of the two
armies. Sir Henry was asked by the prince to send some of his troops
across the river to watch the enemy, and he chose that commanded by
Harry, rather for the sake of getting the lad away from the temptations
and dissipation of Oxford than to give him an opportunity of
distinguishing himself. The troop commanded by Sir Ralph Willoughby was
also on outpost duty, and lay at no great distance from the village in
which Harry quartered his men after crossing the river. The Roundhead
cavalry were known to be but three or four miles away, and the utmost
vigilance was necessary.

Harry gave orders that the troops should be distributed through the
village--five men to a house. Straw was to be brought in at night, and
laid on the floor of the kitchens, and the men were there to sleep, with
their arms by their sides, ready for instant service. One of each party
was to stand sentry over the five horses which were to be picketed to
the palings in front of the house. At the first alarm he was at once to
awake his comrades, who were to mount instantly, and form in column in
the street. Two pickets were placed three hundred yards from the
village, and two others a quarter of a mile further in advance. Harry
and Jacob took up their residence in the village inn, and arranged
alternately to visit the pickets and sentries every two hours.

"They shall not catch us napping, Jacob. This is my first command on
detached duty. You and I have often remarked upon the reckless ways of
our leaders. We have an opportunity now of carrying our own ideas into
effect."

At three o'clock Jacob visited the outposts. All was still, and nothing
had occurred to give rise to any suspicion of the vicinity of an enemy.
Half an hour later one of the advanced pickets galloped in. They heard,
he said, a noise as of a large body of horse, away to the right, and it
seemed as if it was proceeding toward Chalcombe, the village where Sir
Ralph Willoughby's troop was quartered. Two minutes later, thanks to
Harry's arrangements, the troop were mounted and in readiness for
action.

The first faint dawn of day had begun. Suddenly the stillness was broken
by the sound of pistol shots and shouts from the direction of Chalcombe,
which lay a mile away.

"It is likely," Harry said, "that Sir Ralph has been caught napping. He
is brave, but he is reckless, and the discipline of his troop is of the
slackest. Let us ride to his rescue."

The troop filed out from the village, and turned down the side road
leading to Chalcombe. Harry set spurs to his horse and led the column at
a gallop. The sound of shots continued without intermission, and
presently a bright light shot up.

"Methinks," Harry said to Jacob, "the Roundheads have caught our men
asleep, and it is an attack upon the houses rather than a cavalry
fight."

It was scarcely five minutes from the time they started when they
approached the village. By the light of a house which had been set on
fire, Harry saw that his conjecture was well founded. The Roundheads
were dismounted, and were attacking the houses.

Halting just outside the village, Harry formed his men with a front
across the whole road, and directed the lines to advance, twenty yards
apart. Then, placing himself at their head, he gave the word, and
charged down the street upon the Roundheads. The latter, occupied by
their attack upon the houses, were unconscious of the presence of their
foe until he was close upon them, and were taken utterly by surprise.
The force of the charge was irresistible, and the Roundheads, dispersed
and on foot, were cut down in all directions. Groups of twos and threes
stood together and attempted resistance, but the main body thought only
of regaining their horses. In three minutes after the Royalists entered
the village the surviving Roundheads were in full flight, hotly pursued
by the victorious Cavaliers. These, being for the most part better
mounted, overtook and slew many of the Roundheads, and not more than
half the force which had set out returned to their quarters at Didcot.
The pursuit continued to within half a mile of that place, and then
Harry, knowing that there was a force of Roundhead infantry there, drew
off from the pursuit, and returned to Chalcombe. He found that more
than half of Sir Ralph Willoughy's men had been killed, many having been
cut down before they could betake themselves to their arms, those
quartered in the inn, and at two or three of the larger houses, having
alone maintained a successful resistance until the arrival of succor.

Sir Ralph Willoughby was furious. The disaster was due to his own
carelessness in having contented himself with placing two pickets in
advance of the village, and permitting the whole remainder of his force
to retire to bed. Consequently the picket, on riding in upon the
approach of the enemy, were unable to awake and call them to arms before
the Roundheads were upon them. In his anger he turned upon Harry, and
fiercely demanded why he had not sent him news of the approach of the
enemy.

"You must have known it," he said. "Your men were all mounted and in
readiness, or they could not have arrived here so soon. You must have
been close at hand, and only holding off in order that you might boast
of having come to my relief."

Harry, indignant at these words, turned on heel without deigning to give
an answer to the angry man, and at once rode back to his own quarters.
Two hours later Prince Rupert rode up. The firing had been reported, and
Prince Rupert had ridden with a body of horse to Chalcombe. Here he had
heard Sir Ralph Willoughby's version of the story, and had requested
that officer to ride with him to Harry's quarters. The prince, with
several of his principal officers, alighted at the inn, outside which
Harry received him. Prince Rupert led the way into the house.

"Master Furness," he said, "Sir Ralph Willoughby accuses you of having
played him false, and left his party to be destroyed on account of the
quarrel existing between you, touching that affair at Newbury. What
have you to say to this? He alleges that you must have been close at
hand, and moved not a finger to save him until half his troop was
destroyed."

"It is wholly false, sir," Harry said. "Seeing that the enemy were so
close, I had placed my pickets well in advance, and ordered my men to
lie down in their clothes, with their arms beside them, on straw in the
kitchens, ready to mount at a moment's warning. I quartered five in each
house, having their horses fastened in front, and one of each party
stationed at the door, where he could observe the horses and wake the
men on the instant. Thus, when my pickets came in with the news that
troops were heard moving toward Chalcombe, my troop was in less than two
minutes in the saddle. As we rode out of the village we heard the first
shot, and five minutes later charged the Roundheads in the streets of
the village. Had we not hastened, methinks that neither Sir Ralph
Willoughby nor any of his troops would have been alive now to tell the
tale. You can question, sir, my lieutenant, or any of my troopers, and
you will hear that matters went precisely as I have told you."

"You have done well indeed, Master Furness," Prince Rupert said warmly,
"and I would that many of my other officers showed the same
circumspection and care as you have done. Now, Sir Ralph, let me hear
what arrangements you made against surprise."

"I set pickets in front of the village," Sir Ralph said sulkily.

"And what besides?" the prince asked. "Having done that, did you and
your officers and men go quietly to sleep, as if the enemy were a
hundred miles away?"

Sir Ralph was silent.

"Fie, for shame, sir!" the prince said sternly. "Your own carelessness
has brought disaster upon you, and instead of frankly owning your fault,
and thanking Master Furness for having redeemed your error, saved the
remnant of your troop, and defeated the Roundheads heavily, your
jealousy and envy of the lad have wrought you to bring false accusations
against him. Enough, sir," he said peremptorily, seeing the glance of
hatred which Sir Ralph cast toward Harry. "Sufficient harm has been done
already by your carelessness--see that no more arises from your bad
temper. I forbid this quarrel to go further; until the king's enemies
are wholly defeated there must be no quarrels between his friends. And
should I hear of any further dispute on your part with Master Furness, I
shall bring it before the king, and obtain his warrant for your
dismissal from this army."

The following day Harry and his troop moved further down the river, the
enemy having fallen back from Didcot. He was placed at a village where
there was a ford across the river. The post was of importance, as its
position prevented the enemy from making raids into the country, where
stores of provisions and cattle had been collected for the use of the
army at Oxford. Harry's force was a small one for the defense of such a
post; but there appeared little danger of an attack, as Prince Rupert,
with a large force of cavalry, lay but a mile or two distant. A few days
after their arrival, however, Prince Rupert started with his horse to
drive back a party of the enemy whom he heard were lying some miles
north of Reading.

"Prince Rupert never seems to have room for two ideas in his head at the
same time," Jacob said. "The moment he hears of an enemy off he rides at
full gallop, forgetting that he has left us alone here. It is well if
the Roundheads at Reading do not sally out and attack us, seeing how
useful this ford would be to them."

"I agree with you, Jacob, and we will forthwith set to work to render
the place as defensible as we may."

"We had best defend the other side of the ford, if they advance," Jacob
said. "We could make a far better stand there."

"That is true, Jacob; but though we could there bar them from entering
our country, they, if they obtained the village, would shut the door to
our entering theirs. No, it is clear that it our duty to defend the
village as long as we can, if we should be attacked."

Harry now set his men to work to make loopholes in the cottages and
inclosure walls, and to connect the latter by banks of earth, having
thorn branches set on the top. Just at the ford itself stood a large
water-mill, worked by a stream which here ran into the river. Harry
placed sacks before all the windows, leaving only loopholes through
which to fire. Some of the troop carried pistols only; others had
carbines; and some, short, wide-mouthed guns, which carried large
charges of buckshot. Pickets were sent forward a mile toward Reading.

Early in the afternoon these galloped in with the news that a heavy
column of infantry and cavalry, with two pieces of artillery, were
approaching along the road. Harry at once dispatched a messenger, with
orders to ride until he found Prince Rupert, to tell him of the state he
was in, and ask him to hurry to his assistance, giving assurance that he
would hold the village as long as possible. All now labored vigorously
at the works of defense. Half an hour after the alarm had been given the
enemy were seen approaching.

"There must be over five hundred men, horse and foot," Jacob said, as
from the upper story of the mill he watched with Harry the approach of
the enemy. "With fifty men we shall never be able to defend the circuit
of the village."

"Not if they attack all round at once," Harry agreed. "But probably
they will fall upon us in column, and behind stone walls we can do much.
We must keep them out as long as we can; then fall back here, and
surround ourselves with a ring of fire."

As soon as it was known that the enemy were approaching Harry had given
orders that all the inhabitants should evacuate their houses and cross
the river, taking with them such valuables as they could carry. There
were several horses and carts in the village, and these were at once put
in requisition, and the people crossing and recrossing the river rapidly
carried most of their linen and other valuables over in safety, the men
continuing to labor for the preservation of their goods, even after the
fight commenced.

The Roundheads halted about four hundred yards from the village. Just as
they did so there was a trampling of horses, and Sir Ralph Willoughby,
with his troop, now reduced to thirty strong, rode into the village. He
drew up his horse before Harry.

"Master Furness," he said, "Prince Rupert has forbidden me to test your
courage in the way gentlemen usually do so. But there is now a means
open. Let us see which will ride furthest--you or I--into the ranks of
yonder horsemen."

Harry hesitated a moment; then he said gravely:

"My life is not my own to throw away, Sir Ralph. My orders are to hold
this place. That I can best do on foot, for even if our troops united
were to rout the enemy's cavalry, their footmen would still remain, and
would carry the village. No, sir, my duty is to fight here."

"I always thought you a coward!" Sir Ralph exclaimed; "now I know it,"
and, with a taunting laugh, he ordered his men to follow him, issued
from the village, and prepared, with his little band, to charge the
Roundhead horse, about a hundred and fifty strong.

Just as they formed line, however, the enemy's' guns opened, and a shot
struck Sir Ralph full in the chest, hurling him, a shattered corpse, to
the ground.

His men, dismayed at the fall of their leader, drew rein.

"Fall back, men," Harry shouted from behind, "fall back, and make a
stand here. You must be cut to pieces if you advance."

The troop, who had no other officer with them, at once obeyed Harry's
orders. They had heard the conversation between him and their leader,
and although prepared to follow Sir Ralph, who was the landlord of most
of them, they saw that Harry was right, and that to attack so numerous a
body of horse and foot was but to invite destruction.




 

A STUBBORN DEFENSE.


A half-dozen or so of Sir Ralph Willoughby's troopers declared that now
their lord was dead they would fight no further, and straightway rode
off through the village and across the ford. The rest, however, seeing
that a brave fight against odds was about to commence, declared their
willingness to put themselves under Harry's orders. They were at once
dismounted and scattered along the line of defenses. After the Roundhead
cannon had fired a few shots their cavalry charged, thinking to ride
into the village. But the moment Sir Ralph's troopers had re-entered it
Harry had heaped up across the road a quantity of young trees and bushes
which he had cut in readiness. Not a shot was fired until the horsemen
reached this obstacle, and then so heavy a fire was poured upon them, as
they dismounted and tried to pull it asunder, that, with a loss of many
men, they were forced to retreat.

The infantry now advanced, and a severe fight began. Harry's eighty men,
sheltered behind their walls, inflicted heavy damage upon the enemy,
who, however, pressed on stoutly, one column reaching the obstruction
across the road, and laboring to destroy it. All the horses, with the
exception of twenty, had been sent across the ford, and when Harry saw
that in spite of the efforts of his men the enemy were destroying the
abattis, he mounted twenty men upon these horses, placing Jacob at
their head. Then he drew off as many defenders from other points as he
could, and bade these charge their pistols and blunderbusses to the
mouth with balls. As the enemy effected a breach in the abattis and
streamed in, Jacob with his horse galloped down upon them at full speed.
The reserve poured the fire of their heavily loaded pieces upon the mass
still outside, and then aided Jacob's horse by falling suddenly on those
within. So great was the effect that the enemy were driven back, and the
column retired, the breach in the abattis being hastily filled up,
before the cavalry, who were waiting the opportunity, could charge down
upon it.

In the meantime, however, the enemy were forcing their way in at other
points, and Harry gave word for the outside line of houses to be fired.
The thatched roofs speedily were in flames, and as the wind was blowing
from the river dense clouds of smoke rolled down upon the assailants. It
was now only the intervals between the houses which had to be defended,
and for an hour the stubborn resistance continued, the Royalist troops
defending each house with its inclosure to the last, and firing them as
they retreated, their own loss being trifling in comparison with that
which they inflicted upon their assailants.

At last the whole of the defenders were gathered in and round the mill.
This was defended from attack by the mill stream, which separated it
from the village, and which was crossed only by the road leading down to
the ford. The bridge was a wooden one, and this had been already partly
sawn away. As soon as the last of the defenders crossed the remainder of
the bridge was chopped down. Along the line of the stream Harry had
erected a defense, breast high, of sacks of wheat from the mill. The
enemy, as they straggled out through the burning village, paused, on
seeing the strong position which yet remained to be carried. The mill
stream was rapid and deep, and the approaches swept by the fire from the
mill. There was a pause, and then the cannon were brought up and fire
opened upon the mill, the musketry keeping up an incessant rattle from
every wall and clump of bushes.

The mill was built of wood, and the cannon shot went through and through
it. But Harry directed his men to place rows of sacks along each floor
facing the enemy, and lying down behind these to fire through holes
pierced in the planks. For half an hour the cannonade continued, and
then the enemy were seen advancing, carrying beams and the trunks of
small trees, to make a bridge across the stream. Had Harry's men been
armed with muskets it would have been next to impossible for the enemy
to succeed in doing this in the face of their fire. But the fire of
their short weapons was wild and uncertain, except at short distances.
Very many of the Roundheads fell, but others pressed forward bravely,
and succeeded in throwing their beams across the stream. By this time
Harry had led out all his force from the mill, and a desperate fight
took place at the bridge. The enemy lined the opposite bank in such
force that none of the defenders could show their heads above the
barricade of sacks, and Harry came to the conclusion that further
resistance was vain. He ordered Jacob to take all the men with the
exception of ten and to retire at once across the ford. He himself with
the remainder would defend the bridge till they were fairly across, and
would then rush over and join them as he might.

With a heavy heart Jacob was preparing to obey this order, when he heard
a loud cheer, and saw Prince Rupert, heading a large body of horse, dash
into the river on the other side. The enemy saw him too. There was an
instant cessation of their fire, and before Prince Rupert had gained
the bank the Roundheads were already in full retreat for Reading. The
bridge was hastily repaired, and the prince pursued for some distance,
chasing their cavalry well-nigh into Reading. Their infantry, however,
held together, and regained that town in safety.

Upon his return Prince Rupert expressed his warm admiration at the
prolonged and gallant defense which Harry had made, and said that the
oldest soldier in the army could not have done better. At Harry's
request he promised the villagers that the next day money should be sent
out from the king's treasury to make good the losses which they had
sustained. Then he left a strong body of horse to hold the village, and
directed Harry to ride with him with his troop to Oxford.

"I have a mission for you, Master Furness," he said, as they rode along.
"I have already told his majesty how coolly and courageously you
conducted yourself in that sore strait in which we were placed together.
The king has need of a messenger to Scotland. The mission is a difficult
one, and full of danger. It demands coolness and judgment as well as
courage. I have told his majesty that, in spite of your youth, you
possess these qualities, but the king was inclined to doubt whether you
were old enough to be intrusted with such a commission. After to-day's
doings he need have no further hesitation. I spoke to your father but
yesterday, and he has given consent that you shall go, the more readily,
methinks, because the good Cavalier thinks that the morals and ways of
many of our young officers to be in no wise edifying for you, and I
cannot but say that he is right. What sayest thou?"

Harry expressed his willingness to undertake any mission with which he
might be charged. He thought it probable that no great movements would
be undertaken in the south for some time, and with a lad's natural love
of adventure, was pleased at the thought of change and variety.

The Scots were at this time arranging for a close alliance with the
Parliament, which had sent emissaries to Edinburgh to negotiate a Solemn
League and Covenant. Sir Henry Vane, who was an Independent, had been
forced to accede to the demand of the Scotch Parliament, that the
Presbyterian religious system of Scotland should be adopted as that of
England, and after much chaffering for terms on both sides, the document
was signed, and was to bind those who subscribed it to endeavor, without
respect of persons, to extirpate popery and prelacy.

On the 25th of September, nearly a week after the battle of Newbury, all
the members of Parliament still remaining in London assembled in St.
Margaret's Church, and signed the Solemn League and Covenant; but even
at this moment of enthusiasm the parties were not true to each other.
The Scotch expected that Presbyterianism would be introduced into
England, and that Episcopacy would be entirely abolished. The English
members, however, signed the declaration with the full intent of
preserving their own religion, that of a form of Episcopacy, altered
much indeed from that of the Church of England, but still differing
widely from the Scotch system.

The king had many adherents in Scotland, chief of whom was the Earl of
Montrose, a most gallant and loyal nobleman.

Upon the day after the fight in the village the king, on Prince Rupert's
recommendation, appointed Harry Furness to bear dispatches to the earl,
and as he was going north, Prince Rupert placed Lady Sidmouth and her
daughter under his charge to convey to the army of the Earl of
Newcastle, under whom her husband was at this time engaged.

Upon asking what force he should take with him the prince said that he
had better proceed with his own troop, as an escort to the ladies, as
far as the camp of Newcastle, filling up the places of those who had
fallen in the skirmishes and fight of Newbury with other men, so as to
preserve his full tale of fifty troopers. When he had fulfilled the
first part of his mission he was to place his troop at the earl's
service until his return, and to proceed in such manner and disguise as
might seem best to him.

Harry started for the north in high spirits, feeling very proud of the
charge confided to him. Lady Sidmouth and her daughter were placed in a
light litter between two horses. Harry took his place beside it. Half
the troop, under the command of the lieutenant, rode in front; the other
half followed. So they started for the north. It was a long journey, as
they were forced to avoid many towns occupied by Roundheads. Upon the
fourth day of their journey they suddenly heard the explosion of
pistols, and the shouts of men in conflict. Harry ordered his lieutenant
to ride forward with half the troop to some rising ground just in front,
and there they saw a combat going on between a party of Cavaliers and a
force of Roundheads, much superior to them in numbers. Harry joined the
lieutenant, and sending back a man with orders to the remaining half of
the troop to form a guard round the litter, he headed the advance party,
and the twenty-five men rode headlong down into the scene of conflict.
It was a sharp fight for a few minutes, and then the accession of
strength which the Cavaliers had gained gave them the superiority, and
the Roundheads fell back, but in good order.

"You arrived just in time, sir," the leader of the party engaged said.
"I am Master John Chillingworth, and am marching to Hardley House, which
the Puritans are about to besiege. There is no time to delay, for see
you not on yonder hill the gleam of pikes? That is the enemy's footmen.
It is only an advanced party of their horse with which we have had this
affair. You cannot go forward in this direction. There is a strong body
of Roundheads lying a few miles to the north."

Harry rode back to Lady Sidmouth, and after a consultation with her and
with Master Chillingworth, they decided to throw themselves into Hardley
House, where the addition of strength which they brought might enable
them to beat off the Roundheads, and then to proceed on their way. They
learned indeed from a peasant that several bodies of Roundheads were
advancing from various directions, and that Hardley House was strong and
well defended. Of the choice of evils, therefore, they thought this to
be the lightest, and, after an hour's hard riding, they arrived before
its walls. It was an old castellated building, with bastions and walls
capable of standing a siege. The party were gladly received by the
master, Sir Francis Burdett, who had placed his castle in a posture of
defense, but was short of men. Upon the news of the approach of the
enemy he had hastily driven a number of cattle into the yard, and had
stores of provisions sufficient to stand a siege for some time.

In a short time the Parliament force, consisting of five hundred footmen
and two hundred horse, appeared before the castle, and summoned it to
surrender. Sir Francis refused to do so, and fired a gun in token of
defiance. Soon a train was seen approaching in the distance, and four
guns were dragged by the enemy to a point of high ground near the
castle. Here the Roundheads began to throw up a battery, but were
mightily inconvenienced while doing so by the guns of the castle, which
shot briskly against them. Working at night, however, in two days they
completed the battery, which, on the third morning, opened fire upon the
castle. The guns were much heavier than those upon the walls, and the
shot, directed at a curtain between two towers, battered the stone
sorely. The Parliament footmen were drawn back a space from the walls so
as to avoid the fire of muskets from the defenders. There were in all in
the castle about two hundred men, one hundred having been collected
before the arrival of the troops of horse. These determined upon making
a desperate resistance when the wall should give way, which would, they
doubted not, be upon the following day. Everything that could be done
was tried to hinder the destruction made by the enemy's shot. Numbers of
sacks were filled with earth, and lowered from the walls above so as to
hang in regular order before it, and so break the force of the shot.
This had some effect, but gradually the wall crumbled beneath the blows
of the missiles from the Roundhead guns.

"We are useless here, save as footmen," Harry said that night to his
host. "There is a postern gate, is there not, behind the castle?
Methinks that if we could get out in the dark unobserved, and form close
to the walls, so that their pickets lying around might not suspect us of
purposing to issue forth, we might, when daylight dawned, make an attack
upon their guns, and if we could spike these the assault would probably
cease."

The attempt was determined upon. The Roundhead infantry were disposed
behind as well as in front of the castle, so as to prevent the escape of
the besieged; but the camp was at a distance of some four hundred yards.
The chains of the drawbridge across the moat were oiled, as were the
bolts of the doors, and at three in the morning the gate was opened, and
the drawbridge lowered across the moat. A thick layer of sacks was then
placed upon the drawbridge. The horses' hoofs were also muffled with
sacking, and then, one by one, the horses were led out, the drawbridge
was drawn up again, and all was quiet. No sound or motion in the Puritan
camp betrayed that their exit was observed, and they could hear the
challenges of the circuit of sentries passed from man to man.

When the first streak of dawn was seen in the east the troop mounted
their horses, and remained quiet until the light should be sufficient to
enable them to see the nature of the ground over which they would have
to pass. This they would be able to do before they themselves were
observed, standing as they were close under the shadow of the walls of
the castle. As soon as it was sufficiently light the trumpets sounded,
and with a burst they dashed across the country. Heeding not the bugle
calls in the camp of the Puritan infantry, they rode straight at the
guns. These were six hundred yards distant, and before the artillerymen
could awake to their danger, the Royalists were upon them. Those that
stood were cut down, and in a minute the guns were spiked. Then the
cavalry swept round, and as the Puritan horse hastily formed up, they
charged them. Although but half their numbers, they had the superiority
in the surprise at which they took their foes, and in the fact of the
latter being but half armed, not having had time to put on their
breastplates. The combat was a short one, and in a few minutes the
Puritans were flying in all directions. The pikemen were now approaching
on either side in compact bodies, and against these Harry knew that his
horsemen could do nothing. He therefore drew them off from the castle,
and during the day circled round and round the place, seizing several
carts of provisions destined for the wants of the infantry, and holding
them in a sort of leaguer.

That night, finding that their guns were disabled, their horse defeated,
and themselves cut off, the rebel infantry drew off, and gave up the
siege of the place. The next morning the cavalry re-entered the castle
in triumph, and having received the hearty thanks of Sir Francis
Burdett, and leaving with him the troop of Master Chillingworth, who
intended to remain there, Harry proceeded on his way north, and reached
York without further adventure.

During the ten days that they had journeyed together Lady Sidmouth had
been greatly pleased with the attention and character of Harry Furness.
He was always cheerful and courteous, without any of that light tone of
flippancy which distinguished the young Cavaliers of the period, and her
little daughter was charmed with her companion. Harry received the
hearty thanks of Sir Henry Sidmouth for the care with which he had
conducted his wife through the dangers of the journey, and then, having
so far discharged his duty, he left his troop at York, and started for
Scotland.

On the way he had discussed with Jacob the measures which he intended to
take for his journey north. Jacob had begged earnestly to accompany him,
and as Harry deemed that his shrewdness might be of great use, he
determined to take him with him, as well as another of his troop. The
latter was a merry fellow, named William Long. He was of grave and sober
demeanor, and never smiled, even while causing his hearers to be
convulsed with laughter. He had a keen sense of humor, was a
ready-witted and courageous fellow, and had frequently distinguished
himself in the various skirmishes. He was the son of a small tenant of
Sir Henry Furness.

His farm was near the hall, and, although three or four years older
than Harry, he had as a boy frequently accompanied him when out hawking,
and in other amusements. Harry felt that, with two attached and faithful
comrades like these, he should he able to make his way through many
dangers. At York he had procured for himself and his followers suits of
clothes of a grave and sober cut, such as would be worn by yeomen; and
here they laid aside their Cavalier garments, and proceeded northward.
They traveled quietly forward as far as Durham, and then went west, as
Berwick was held for the Parliament. They carried weapons, for at that
time none traveled unarmed, and the country through which they had to
pass was greatly disturbed, the moss troopers having taken advantage of
the disorders of the times to renew the habits of their forefathers, and
to make raids upon their southern neighbors, and carry off cattle and
horses. They carried with them but little money, a small quantity in
their valises, and a few gold pieces concealed about their persons, each
choosing a different receptacle, so that in case of pillage some at
least might retain sufficient to carry them on their way. Avoiding the
large towns, where alone they would be likely to be questioned, they
crossed the border, and rode into Scotland.

Upon the day after their crossing the frontier they saw a body of
horsemen approaching them. These drew up when they reached them, Harry
having previously warned his comrades to offer no resistance, as the
party were too strong for them, and his mission was too important to
allow the king's cause to be hazarded by any foolish acts of pugnacity.

"Are you for the king or the kirk?" the leader asked.

"Neither for one nor the other," Harry said. "We are peaceable yeomen
traveling north to buy cattle, and we meddle not in the disputes of the
time."

"Have you any news from the south?"

"Nothing," Harry replied. "We come from Durham, and since the news of
the battle of Newbury, no tidings have come of importance."

The man looked inquisitively at the horses and valises; but Harry had
chosen three stout ponies sufficiently good to carry them, but offering
no temptations to pillagers, and the size of the valises promised but
little from their contents.

"Since you are riding north to buy cattle," the leader said, "you must
have money with you, and money is short with us in these bad times."

"We have not," Harry said; "judging it possible that we might meet with
gentlemen who felt the pressure of the times, we have provided ourselves
with sufficient only to take us up to Kelso, where dwells our
correspondent, who will, we trust, have purchased and collected
sufficient cattle for us to take south when we shall learn that a convoy
of troops is traveling in this direction, for we would not place
temptation in the way of those whom we might meet."

"You are a fellow of some humor," the leader said grimly. "But it is
evil jesting on this side of the border."

"I jest not," Harry said. "There is a proverb in Latin, with which
doubtless your worship is acquainted, to the effect that an empty
traveler may sing before robbers, and, although far from including you
and your worshipful following in that category, yet we may be pardoned
for feeling somewhat light-hearted, because we are not overburdened with
money."

The leader looked savagely at the young man; but seeing that his
demeanor and that of his followers was resolute, that they carried
pistols at their holsters and heavy swords, and deeming that nothing but
hard knocks would come of an attack upon them, he surlily bade his
company follow him, and rode on his way again.




 

THE COMMISSIONER OF THE CONVENTION.


At Kelso Harry procured changes of garments, attiring himself as a
Lowland farmer, and his companions as two drovers. They were, as before,
mounted; but the costume of English farmers could no longer have been
supported by any plausible story. They learned that upon the direct road
north they should find many bodies of Scotch troops, and therefore made
for the coast. Two days' riding brought them to the little port of
Ayton.

After taking their supper in the common room of the hostelry, there was
a stir outside, and three men, attired as Puritan preachers, entered the
room. Mine host received them with courtesy, but with none of the eager
welcome usually displayed to guests; for these gentry, although
feared--for their power was very great at the time--were by no means
loved, and their orders at a hostelry were not likely to swell the purse
of the host. Stalking to an unoccupied table next to that at which Harry
and his party were sitting, they took their seats and called for supper.

Harry made a sign to his companions to continue talking together, while
he listened attentively to the conversation of the men behind him. He
gathered from their talk that they were commissioners proceeding from
the Presbyterian Convention in London to discuss with that at Edinburgh
upon the points upon which they could come to an agreement for a common
basis of terms. Their talk turned principally upon doctrinal questions,
upon which Harry's ignorance was entire and absolute; but he saw at once
that it would do good service to the king if he could in some way
prevent these men continuing upon their journey, and so for a time
arrest the progress of the negotiations between the king's enemies in
England and Scotland, for at this time the preachers were the paramount
authorities in England. It was they who insisted upon terms, they who
swayed the councils of the nation, and it was not until Cromwell, after
overthrowing the king, overthrew the Parliament, which was for the main
part composed of their creatures, that the power of the preachers came
to an end. It would, of course, have been easy for Harry and his friends
to attack these men during their next day's journey, but this would have
involved the necessity of killing them--from which he shrank--for an
assault upon three godly men traveling on the high business of the
Convention to the Scottish capital would have caused such an outcry that
Harry could not hope to continue on his way without the certainty of
discovery and arrest.

Signing to his comrades to remain in their seats, he strolled off toward
the port, and there entered a public house, which, by its aspect, was
frequented by seafaring men. It was a small room that he entered, and
contained three or four fishermen, and one whom a certain superiority in
dress betokened to be the captain of a vessel. They were talking of the
war, and of the probability of the Scottish army taking part in it. The
fishermen were all of the popular party; but the captain, who seemed a
jovial fellow, shrugged his shoulders over the religious squabbles, and
said that, for his part, he wanted nothing but peace.

"Not," he said, "that the present times do not suit are rarely in
purse. Men are too busy now to look after the doings of every lugger
that passes along the coast, and never were French goods so plentiful or
so cheap. Moreover," he said, "I find that not unfrequently passengers
want to be carried to France or Holland. I ask no questions; I care not
whether they go on missions from the Royalists or from the Convention; I
take their money; I land them at their destination; no questions are
asked. So the times suit me bravely; but for all that I do not like to
think of Englishmen and Scotchmen arrayed against their fellows. I
cannot see that it matters one jot whether we are predestinate or not
predestinate, or whether it is a bishop who governs a certain church or
a presbyter. I say let each worship in his own way, and not concern
himself about his fellows. If men would but mind their own affairs in
religion as they do in business it would be better for us all."

Harry, as he drank the glass of beer he had ordered, had joined
occasionally in the conversation, not taking any part, but agreeing
chiefly with the sea-captain in his desire for peace.

"I too," he said, "have nothing to grumble at. My beasts fetch good
prices for the army, and save that there is a want of hands, I was never
doing better. Still I would gladly see peace established."

Presently the fishermen, having finished their liquor, retired, and the
captain, looking keenly at Harry, said, "Methinks, young sir, that you
are not precisely what you seem!"

"That is so," Harry replied; "I am on business here, It matters not on
which side, and it may be that we may strike a bargain together."

"Do you want to cross the channel?" the captain asked, laughing. "You
seem young to have put your head in a noose already."

"No," Harry said, "I do not want to cross myself; but I want to send
some others across. I suppose that if a passenger or two were placed on
board your ship, to be landed in Holland, you would not deem it
necessary to question them closely, or to ascertain whether they also
were anxious to arrive at that destination?"

"By no means," the captain replied. "Goods consigned to me will be
delivered at the port to which they are addressed, and I should consider
that with passengers as with goods, I must carry them to the port for
which their passage is taken."

"Good," Harry said; "if that is the case, methinks that when you
sail--and," he asked, breaking off, "when do you sail?"

"To-morrow morning, if the wind is fair," the captain answered. "But if
it would pay me better to stop for a few hours, I might do so."

"To-morrow night, if you will wait till then," Harry said, "I will place
three passengers on board, and will pay you your own sum to land them at
Flushing, or any other place across the water to which you may be bound.
I will take care that they will make no complaints whatever, or address
any remonstrance to you, until after you have fairly put to sea. And
then, naturally, you will feel yourself unable to alter the course of
your ship."

"But," the captain observed, "I must be assured that these passengers
who are so anxious to cross the water are not men whose absence might
cause any great bother. I am a simple man, earning my living as honestly
as the times will allow me to do, and I wish not to embroil myself with
the great parties of the State."

"There may be an inquiry," Harry replied; "but methinks it will soon
drop. They are three preachers of London, who are on their way to
dispute concerning points of religion with the divines in Scotland. The
result of their disputation may perchance be that an accord may be
arrived at between the divines of London and Edinburgh; and in that
case, I doubt not that the army now lying at Dundee would move south,
and that the civil war would therefore become more extended and cruel
than ever."

The captain laughed.

"I am not fond of blackbirds on board my ship," he said. "They are ever
of ill omen on the sea. But I will risk it for so good a cause. It is
their pestilent religious disputes which have stirred up the nations to
war, and I doubt not that even should some time elapse before these
gentlemen can again hold forth in England, there are plenty of others to
supply their place."

An agreement was speedily arrived at as to the terms of passage, for
Harry was well provided with money, having drawn at Kelso from an agent
devoted to the Royal cause, upon whom he had letters of credit.

The next morning early Harry went to a carter in the town, and hired a
cart for the day, leaving a deposit for its safe return at night. Then,
mounting their horses, the three Royalists rode off just as the
preachers were going forth from the inn. The latter continued their
course at the grave pace suitable to their calling and occupation,
conversing vigorously upon the points of doctrine which they intended to
urge upon their fellows at Edinburgh. Suddenly, just where the road
emerged from a wood on to a common, three men dashed out, and fell upon
them. The preachers roared lustily for mercy, and invoked the vengeance
of the Parliament upon those who ventured to interfere with them.

"We are charged," one said, "with a mission to the Convention at
Edinburgh, and it is as much as your heads are worth to interfere with
us."

"Natheless," Harry said, "we must even risk our heads. You must follow
us into the wood, or we shall be under the necessity of 'blowing out
your brains.'"

Much crestfallen, the preachers followed their captors into the wood.
There they were despoiled of their hats and doublets, tied securely by
cords, gagged, and placed, in spite of their remonstrances and
struggles, in three huge sacks.

At midnight the Annette was lying alongside the wharf at Ayton, when a
cart drove up. Three men alighted from it, and one hailed the captain,
who was standing on deck.

"I have brought the three parcels thou wottest of," he said. "They will
need each two strong men to carry them on board."

The captain, with two sailors, ascended to the quay.

"What have we here?" said one of the sailors; "there is some live
creature in this sack."

"It is a young calf," Harry said; "when you are well out to sea you can
give it air."

The men laughed, for having frequently had passengers to cross to the
Continent, they shrewdly guessed at the truth; and the captain had
already told them that the delay of a day would put some money into each
of their pockets. Having seen the three sacks deposited on the deck of
the ship, when the sails were immediately hoisted, and the Annette
glided away on her course seaward, the cart was driven round to the
house where it had been hired. The stipulated price was paid, the
deposit returned, and the hirer then departed.

Riding toward Edinburgh, Harry agreed with his comrades that as he, as
the apparent leader of the party, would be the more likely to be
suspected and arrested, it would be better for the documents of which
they were the carriers, as well as the papers found upon the persons of
the Puritans, to be intrusted to the charge of Jacob and William Long.
Harry charged them, in the event of anything happening to him, to pay no
heed to him whatever, but to separate from him and mix with the crowd,
and then to make their way, as best they might, to the Earl of Montrose.

"It matters nothing," he said, "my being arrested, They can prove
nothing against me, as I shall have no papers on my body, while it is
all-important that you should get off. The most that they can do to me
is to send me to London, and a term of imprisonment as a malignant is
the worst that will befall me."

The next day they entered the town by the Canongate, and were surprised
and amused at the busy scene passing there. Riding to an inn, they put
up their horses and dismounted. Harry purposed to remain there for three
or four days to learn the temper of the people.

The next morning he strolled out into the streets, followed at some
little distance by Jacob and William Long, He had not the least fear of
being recognized, and for the time gave himself up thoroughly to the
amusement of the moment. He had not proceeded far, however, when he ran
full tilt against a man in a black garb, who, gazing at him, at once
shouted out at the top of his voice, "Seize this man, he is a malignant
and a spy," and to his horror Harry discovered the small preacher with
whom he had twice already been at loggerheads, and who, it seems, had
been dispatched as a member of a previous commission by his party in
London.

In a moment a dozen sturdy hands seized him by his collar. Feeling the
utter uselessness of resistance, and being afraid that should he attempt
to struggle, his friends might be drawn into the matter, Harry quietly
proceeded along the street until he reached the city guardhouse, in a
cell of which he was thrust.

"One would think," he muttered to himself, "that little preacher is an
emissary of Satan himself. Go where I will, this lantern-jawed knave is
sure to crop up and I feel convinced that until I have split his skull I
shall have no safety. I thought I had freed myself of him forever when I
got out of London; and here, in the middle of the Scotch capital, he
turns up as sharpsighted and as venomous as ever."

An hour or two later Harry was removed under a guard to the city prison,
and in the evening the doors were opened and a guard appeared and
briefly ordered him to follow. Under the escort of four men he was led
through the streets to a large building, and then conducted to a room in
which a number of persons, some of them evidently of high rank, were
sitting. At the head of the table was a man of sinister aspect. He had
red hair and eyebrows, and a foxy, cunning face, and Harry guessed at
once that he was in the presence of the Earl of Argyll--a man who, even
more than the rest of his treacherous race, was hated and despised by
loyal Scotchmen. In all their history, a great portion of the Scottish
nobles were ever found ready to take English gold, and to plot against
their country. But the Argylls had borne a bad pre-eminence even among
these. They had hunted Wallace, had hounded down Bruce, and had ever
been prominent in fomenting dissensions in their country; the present
earl was probably the coldest and most treacherous of his race.

"We are told," he said sternly to the prisoner, "that you are a follower
of the man Charles; that you have been already engaged in plottings
among the good citizens of London, and we shrewdly suspect that your
presence here bodes no good to the state. What hast thou to say in thy
defense?"

"I do not know that I am charged with any offence," Harry said quietly.
"I am an English gentleman, who, wishing to avoid the disorders in his
own country, has traveled north for peace and quietness. If you have
aught to urge against me or any evidence to give, I shall be prepared to
confute it. As for the preacher, whose evidence has caused my arrest, he
hath simply a grudge against me for a boyish freak, from which he
suffered at the time when I made my escape from a guardroom in London,
and his accusation against me is solely the result of prejudice."

Harry had already, upon his arrival at the jail, been searched
thoroughly, having been stripped, and even the folds and linings of his
garments ripped open, to see that they contained no correspondence.
Knowing that nothing whatever could have been found against him, unless,
indeed, his followers had also fallen into the hands of the Roundheads,
Harry was able to assume a position of injured innocence.

"Your tone comports not with your condition," the Earl of Argyll said
harshly. "We have found means here to make men of sterner mold than
thine speak the truth, and in the interests of the state we shall not
hesitate to use them against you also. The torturer here hath
instruments which would tear you limb from limb, and, young sir, these
will not be spared unless that malapert tongue of thine gives us the
information we desire to learn."

"I decline to answer any questions beyond what I have already said,"
Harry replied firmly. "I tell you that I am an English gentleman
traveling here on my own private business, and it were foul wrong for me
to be seized and punished upon the suspicion of such a one as that man
there;" and he pointed contemptuously to the preacher.

"You will be brought up again in two days," the earl said, "and if by
that time you have not made up your mind to confess all, it will go hard
with you. Think not that the life of a varlet like you will weigh for
one moment in the scale with the safety of the nation, or that any
regard for what you may consider in England the usages of war will
prevail here."

He waved his hand, and Harry was conducted back to jail, feeling far
more uneasy than he had done, for he knew that in Scotland very
different manners prevailed to those which characterized the English. In
England, throughout the war, no unnecessary bloodshed took place, and up
to that time the only persons executed in cold blood had been the two
gentlemen convicted of endeavoring to corrupt the Parliament in favor of
the king. But in Scotland, where civil broils were constant, blood was
ever shed recklessly on both sides; houses were given to the flames;
men, women, and children slaughtered; lands laid waste; and all the
atrocities which civil war, heightened by religious bigotry, could
suggest, perpetrated.

Late that evening, the door of the prison opened, and a preacher was
shown into the room.

"I have come," he said in a nasal tone, "misguided young man, to pray
you to consider the wickedness of your ways. It is written that the
ungodly shall perish, and I would fain lead you from the errors of your
way before it is too late."

Harry had started as the speaker began; but he remained immovable until
the jailer closed the door.

"Jacob," he exclaimed, "how mad, how imprudent of you! I ordered you
specially, if I was arrested, to pay no heed, but to make your way
north."

"I know that you did," Jacob said. "But you see you yourself talked of
remaining for three days in Edinburgh. Therefore, I knew that there
could be no pressing need of my journey north; and hearing some
whispers of the intention of the lord president to extract from a
certain prisoner the news of a plot with which he was supposed to be
connected, I thought it even best to come and see you."

"But how have you obtained this garb?" Harry asked; "and how, above all,
have you managed to penetrate hither?"

"Truly," Jacob said, "I have undertaken a difficult task in thy behalf,
for I have to-night to enter into a disputation with many learned
divines, and I dread that more than running the risk of meeting the Earl
of Argyll, who, they say, has the face of a fox, and the heart of a
devil."

"What mean you?" Harry asked.

"After we saw you dragged off by the townsmen, on being denounced by
that little preacher whose hat I spoiled in St. Paul's churchyard, we
followed your orders, and made back to our hostelry. There William Long
and myself talked the matter over. In the first place, we took all the
papers and documents which were concealed about us, and lifting a board
in the room, hid them beneath it, so that in case of our arrest they
would be safe. As we took out the documents, the commission which we
borrowed from the preachers met our eyes, and it struck me that, armed
with this, we might be enabled to do you service. I therefore at once
purchased cloaks and hats fitting for us as worthy divines from London,
and then, riding a mile or two into the country, we changed our
garments, and entered the good city of Edinburgh as English divines. We
proceeded direct to the house of the chief presbyter, to whom the
letters of commission were addressed, and were received by him with open
arms. I trust that we played our part rarely, and, in truth, the
unctuousness and godliness of William Long passeth belief, and he plays
his part well. Looking as he does far older than I--although in these
days of clean-shaven faces I can make up rarely for thirty--he assumed
the leading part. The presbyter would fain have summoned a number of his
divines for a discussion this evening. But we, pleading fatigue, begged
him to allow us two days of rest. He has, however, invited a few of his
fellows, and we are to wrestle with them this evening in argument. How
we shall get out of it I know not, for my head is altogether in
ignorance of the points in issue. However, there was, among the
documents of the preachers, one setting forth the points in which the
practice of the sect in England and Scotland differed, with the heads of
the arguments to be used. We have looked through these, and, as well as
we could understand the jumble of hard words, have endeavored to master
the points at issue, so we shall to-night confine ourselves to a bare
exposition of facts, and shall put off answering the arguments of the
other side until the drawn battle, which will be fixed for the day after
to-morrow. By the way, we accounted for the absence of our colleague by
saying that he fell sick on the way."

"But what is the use of all this risk?" Harry asked, laughing at the
thought of his two followers discussing theology with the learned
divines of the Scotch Church.

"That, in truth," Jacob said, "I do not yet exactly see; but I trust
that to-morrow we shall have contrived some plan of getting you out of
this prison. I shall return at the same time to-morrow evening."

"How did you get in here?" he asked.

"I had an order from the chief presbyter for entry. Saying that I
believed I knew you, and that my words might have some effect in turning
you from the evil of your ways, I volunteered to exhort you, and shall
give such an account of my mission as will lead them to give me a pass
to see you again to-morrow night."

The following evening Jacob again called, this time accompanied by
William. They brought with them another dress similar to their own.
Their visit was an hour later than upon the preceding evening.

"I learned," Jacob said, "that the guard was changed at eight o'clock,
and it is upon this that the success of our scheme depends. William will
immediately leave, and as he has been seen to enter by the guards
without, and by those at the prison gate, he will pass out without
questioning. In half an hour a fresh guard will be placed at both these
points, and you and I will march out together, armed with permission for
two preachers to pass."

The scheme appeared a hopeful one, and William took his departure after
a few minutes, saying to the guards without that he went to fetch a book
of reference which he needed to convince the hard-hearted reprobate
within. He left the door partly ajar, and the guards without were
edified by catching snatches of a discourse of exceeding godliness and
unction, delivered by the preacher to the prisoner.

Presently a trampling without informed Harry and Jacob that the guard
was being changed, and half an hour later they opened the door, and
Jacob, standing for a moment as they went out, addressed a few words of
earnest exhortation to the prisoner supposed to be within, adjuring him
to bethink himself whether it was better to sacrifice his life in the
cause of a wicked king than to purchase his freedom by forsaking the
error of his ways, and turning to the true belief. Then, closing the
door after him, Jacob strode along, accompanied by Harry, to the
guardroom. They passed through the yard of the prison to the gate. There
Jacob produced his pass for the entrance and exit of two divines, and
the guard, suspecting no evil, at once suffered them to go forth.
William had already been to the inn where they stopped, and had told the
host that he was charged to examine the chamber where the persons who
abode there upon the previous day had stopped. There he had taken the
various documents from their hiding-place, and had made his way from the
city. Outside the gates he was joined by the others, and all, at a
speedy but still dignified pace, made their way to the spot where the
horses were concealed, in a little wood in a retired valley. Here they
changed their dress, and, making a bonfire of the garments which they
had taken off, mounted their horses, and rode for the north.




 

MONTROSE.


They stopped for the night at a village fifteen miles away from
Edinburgh, and after they had had their supper Harry inquired of Jacob
how his dispute with the divines had passed off the evening before.

Jacob burst into a fit of laughter.

"It was the funniest thing you ever saw," he said, "Imagine a large
room, with the chief presbyter sitting at a table, and eight other men,
with sour countenances and large turned-down collars and bands, sitting
round it. William Long and I faced them at the other end, looking as
grave and sanctimonious as the rest of them. The proceedings were, of
course, opened with a lengthy prayer, and then the old gentleman in the
center introduced us as the commissioners from London. William rose, and
having got up by heart the instructions to the commissioners, he said
that he would first briefly introduce to his fellow divines the points
as to which differences appeared to exist between the Presbyterians of
the north and those of the south, and concerning which he was instructed
to come to an agreement with them. First, he gave a list of the points
at variance; then he said that he understood that these, quoting from
his document, were the views of his Scotch brethren; and he then
proceeded to give briefly the arguments with which he had been
furnished. He said that his reverend brother and himself were much
wearied with long travel, and that they would fain defer the debate for
another two days, but that in the meantime they would be glad to hear
the views of their friends. Then did one after another of these eight
worthy men rise, and for six mortal hours they poured forth their views.
I do not know whether it was most difficult to avoid laughter or
yawning; but, indeed, Master Harry, it was a weary time. I dared not
look at William, for he put such grave attention and worshipful
reverence on his face that you would have thought he had been born and
bred to the work. When the last of the eight had sat dawn he rose again,
and expressed a marvelous admiration of the learning and eloquence which
his brethren had displayed. Many of their arguments he said, were new to
him--and in this, indeed, I doubt not he spoke truth--and he perceived
that it would be hard to answer all that they had so learnedly adduced.
Upon the other hand, he had much to say; but he was willing to allow
that upon some points he should have difficulty in combating their
views. He prayed them, therefore, to defer the meeting for two days,
when he would willingly give them his views upon the subject, and his
learned brother would also address them. He proposed that the party
should be as small a one as that he saw before him, and that, after
hearing him, they should, if possible, come to some arrangement upon a
few, at least, of the points in dispute, so as to leave as small a number
as might be open to for the public disputation which would follow. The
worshipful party appeared mightily taken with the idea, and, after an
hour's prayer from the chairman, we separated. I hardly slept all night
for laughing, and I would give much to see the faces of that honorable
council when they hear that they have been fooled."

"You have both shown great wisdom, Jacob," Harry said, "and have behaved
in a sore strait with much judgment and discretion. It was lucky for you
that your reverend friend did not, among his eight champions, think of
inviting our little friend from London, for I fear that he would at once
have denounced you as not being the divines whose credentials you
presented."

"I was afraid of that," Jacob said, "and therefore begged him specially,
on this our first conference, to have only ministers of his own circle
present. He mentioned that one or two godly ministers from London were
present in the capital. I replied that I was well aware of that, but
that, as these men were not favored with the instructions of the
convention, and knew not the exact turn which affairs had taken up to the
period of my leaving, their presence might be an embarrassment--which,
indeed, was only the truth."

"We must make a circuit to-morrow," Harry said, "to avoid Stirling, and
will go round by Doune, and thence make for the north. Once among the
mountains we shall be safe from all pursuit, and from any interference
by the Roundheads, for I believe that the clans of this part are all in
favor of Montrose--Argyll's power lying far to the west."

"It will be a comfort," Jacob said, "not to be obliged to talk through
one's nose, and to cast one's eyes upward. I imagine that these
Highlanders are little better than savages."

"That is so," Harry said. "They are, I believe, but little changed since
the days when the Romans struggled with them, and could make no head
north of the Forth."

The next day, by a long circuit, they traveled round Stirling, and
reached the bridge of Doune, there crossing the Teith unquestioned. They
soon left the main road, and struck into the hills. They had not
traveled far when three strange figures suddenly presented themselves.
These men were clad in a garb which to the lads was strange and wild
indeed. The kilt, as worn by Highlanders on show occasions in the
present day is a garment wholly unlike that worn by their ancestors,
being, indeed, little more than a masquerade dress. The kilt of the old
time resembled indeed the short petticoat now worn by savage peoples. It
consisted of a great length of cloth wound round and round the loins,
and falling like a loose petticoat to the knees, a portion being brought
over one shoulder, and then wrapped round and round the body. It was
generally of dark material; the tartans now supposed to be peculiar to
the various clans being then unknown, or at least not worn by the common
people, although the heads of the clans may have worn scarfs of those
patterns. A Highland gentleman or chief, however, dressed in the same
garb as Englishmen--that is, in armor, with doublet and hose. His wild
followers lived in huts of the most primitive description, understood no
language but their own, obeyed the orders of their chiefs to the death,
and knew nothing either of kings or of parliaments. For arms these men
carried a broad target or shield made of bull's hide, and a broadsword
of immense length hanging behind them, the hilt coming above the
shoulder.

What they said the lads could not understand. But when Harry repeated
the word "Montrose," the Highlanders nodded, and pointed to signify that
the road they were pursuing was the right one, and two of them at once
set out with them as escorts.

For several days they traveled north, stopping at little groups of
cabins, where they were always received with rough hospitality, the
assertion of their guides that they were going to the great earl being
quite sufficient passport for them. Bannocks of oatmeal with collops,
sometimes of venison, sometimes of mountain sheep, were always at their
service, washed down by a drink new to the boys, and which at first
brought the water into their eyes. This was called usquebaugh, and had a
strange peaty flavor, which was at first very unpleasant to them, but to
which before they left Scotland they became quite accustomed. The last
two days they traveled upon broad roads again, and being now in a
country devoted to the Earl of Montrose, were under no apprehension
whatever of interference.

At last they reached the place where the earl was residing. His castle
differed in no way from those of the nobility of England. It was
surrounded by walls and towers, and had a moat and other means of
defense. The gate was guarded by men similar in appearance to their
guides, but dressed in better material, and with some attempt at
uniformity. Large numbers of these were gathered in the courtyard, and
among them were men-at-arms attired in southern fashion. The guides,
having performed their duty of conducting these strangers from the
borders of their country, now handed them over to an officer, and he,
upon learning their errand, at once conducted them to the earl.

Montrose was a noble figure, dressed in the height of the fashion of the
day. His face was oval, with a pointed mustache; long ringlets fell
round his head; and his bearing was haughty and majestic. He rose from
his chair and advanced a step toward them.

"Do I understand," he said, "that you are bearers of dispatches from his
gracious majesty?"

"We are, sir," Harry said. "The king was pleased to commit to me various
documents intended for your eye. We left him at Oxford, and have
journeyed north with as little delay as might be in these times. The
dispatches, I believe, will speak for themselves, I have no oral
instructions committed to me."

So saying, Harry delivered the various documents with which they were
charged. The earl instructed the officer to see that they were well
lodged and cared for, and at once proceeded to his private cabinet to
examine the instructions sent him by the king. These were in effect
that, so soon as the army of the convention moved south from Dundee, he
should endeavor to make a great raid with his followers upon the south,
specially attacking the country of Argyll, so as to create a diversion,
and, if possible, cause the recall of the Scotch army to defend their
own capital.

For some weeks the lads stopped with Montrose. They had been furnished
with garments suitable to their condition, and Harry was treated by the
earl with the greatest kindness and courtesy. He often conversed with
him as to the state of politics and of military affairs in England, and
expressed himself as sanguine that he should be able to restore the
authority of the king in Scotland.

"These sour men of the conventicles have ever been stiff-necked and
rebellious," he said, "and have enforced their will upon our monarchs. I
have not forgotten," he went on, striking the hilt of his sword angrily,
"the insults which were put upon Queen Mary when she was preached to and
lectured publicly by the sour fanatic Knox, and was treated, forsooth,
as if she had been some trader's daughter who had ventured to laugh on a
Sunday. Her son, too, was kept under the control of these men until he
was summoned to England. It is time that Scotland were rid of the
domination of these knaves, and if I live I will sweep them from the
land. In courage my wild men are more than a match for the Lowlanders.
It is true that in the old days the clans could never carry their forays
southward, for, unaccustomed to discipline and unprovided with horses or
even with firearms, they fared but badly when opposed to steel-clad men
and knights in armor. But I trust it will be different this time. I
cannot hope to infuse any great discipline among them. But they can at
least be taught to charge in line, and their broad claymores may be
trusted to hew a way for them through the lines of the Lowlanders. I
trust, above all things, that the king will not be persuaded to
negotiate with the traitors who are opposed to him. I know, Master
Furness, that, from what you have said, your views run not there with
mine, and that you think a compromise is desirable. But you do not know
these fanatics as I do. While they clamor for toleration, they are the
narrowest of bigots, and will themselves tolerate nothing. Already I
have news that the convention between the Scotch conventicle and the
English rebels is agreed to, and that an order has gone forth that the
Presbyterian rites are to be observed in all the churches of England.
They say that thousands of divines will be turned from their churches
and their places filled with ignorant fanatics, and this they call
religious liberty. Why, when Laud was in power his rule was as a silken
thread compared to the hempen rope of these bigots, and should the king
make terms with them, it will be only to rule henceforth at their
bidding, and to be but an instrument in their hands for enforcing their
will upon the people of these countries."

Much as Harry desired peace and leaned toward compromise, he saw that
there was much in what the earl said. All the accounts that reached them
from the youth told of the iron tyranny which was being exercised
throughout England. Everywhere good and sincere men were being driven
from their vicarages to live how best they might, for refusing to accept
the terms of the convention. Everywhere their places were filled with
men at once ignorant, bigoted, and intolerant; holy places were
desecrated; the cavalry of the Commons was stabled in St. Paul's; the
colored windows of the cathedrals and churches were everywhere
destroyed; monuments were demolished; and fanaticism of the narrowest
and most stringent kind was rampant.

During the time they spent at the castle the lads were greatly amused in
watching the sports and exercises of the Highlanders. These consisted in
throwing great stones and blocks of wood, in contests with blunted
claymores, in foot races, and in dances executed to the wild and strange
music of the bagpipes--music which Jacob declared was worse than the
caterwauling upon the housetops in Cheapside.

The lads had deferred their journey south owing to the troubled state of
the country, and the fact that the whole of the south of Scotland was in
the hands of the convention. They were therefore waiting an opportunity
for taking ship and traveling by sea into Wales, where the followers of
the king were in the ascendency. At length the earl told them that an
occasion offered, and that although he would gladly keep them by him to
accompany him when he moved south, if they considered that their duty
compelled them to leave he would place them on board a ship bound for
that destination. He did not furnish them with any documents, but bade
Harry repeat to the king the sentiments which he had expressed, which,
indeed, were but the repetition of loyal assurances which he had sent
south by a trusty messenger immediately upon their arrival at the
castle.

The boat in which they embarked was a small one, but was fast; which
proved fortunate, for they were twice chased by ships of the Parliament.
They landed, however, safely at Pembroke, and thence made their way
through the mountains of Wales to Hereford, and joined the king, who was
still at Oxford.

Events had traveled but slowly in England; the doings of the convention
being at that time of greater importance than those of the armies. On
the 19th of January the Scotch army had entered England, having marched
from Edinburgh through the snow. The Marquis of Newcastle was in winter
quarters at York. The town of Newcastle had held out successfully
against the Scots. The English regiments in Ireland had been recalled;
but had been defeated near Nantwich by Sir Thomas Fairfax. Negotiation
after negotiation between the king and the Parliament had failed, and
the king had issued writs for a Parliament to assemble at Oxford. This
met on the 22d of January, and forty-three peers and a hundred and
eighteen commoners had taken their place beside many absent with the
army. Of the peers a large majority were with the Royalist Parliament at
Oxford while at Westminster a majority of the members sent up by the
towns assembled. The Royalist Parliament was sitting at Oxford when
Harry arrived; but their proceedings had not upon the whole been
satisfactory to the king. They had, indeed, passed votes for the raising
of taxes and supplies; but had also insisted upon the king granting
several reforms. Charles, untaught by adversity, was as obstinate as
ever; and instead of using the opportunity for showing a fair
disposition to redress the grievances which had led to the civil war,
and to grant concessions which would have rallied all moderate persons
to his cause, he betrayed much irritation at the opposition which he met
with, and the convocation of Parliament, instead of bringing matters
nearer to an issue, rather heightened the discontents of the times. The
Parliament at Westminster, upon their side, formed a council, under the
title of the committee of the two kingdoms, consisting of seven lords,
fourteen members of the commons, and four Scottish commissioners, into
whose hands the entire conduct of the war, the correspondence with
foreign states, and indeed the whole executive power of the kingdom was
given.

The king received Harry with great condescension and favor, and heard
with satisfaction of the preparations which Montrose was making for an
invasion of the Lowlands of Scotland, and promised Sir Henry to bestow
the rank of knighthood upon his son as soon as he attained the age of
twenty-one.

For some weeks Harry resided with his father at Furness Hall. He then
fell back into Oxford upon the advance of an army from London destined
to besiege that town. This force was far greater than any that the king
could raise. It consisted of two separate forces, under the command of
Essex and Waller. Presently the town was besieged, and although the
walls were very strong, the attacking force was so numerous that
resistance appeared to be hopeless. On the night of the 3d of June the
king left the city secretly, attended only by two or three personal
friends, and passed safely between the two armies. These, instead of
acting in unison, in which case the besieging lines would have been
complete, and the king unable to leave the place, were kept apart by the
dissensions of their generals. A council of war took place, and Essex
determined to march to the west. The committee in London ordered him to
retrace his steps, and go in pursuit of the king, who had made for
Worcester. But Essex replied to the committee that he could not carry on
war in pursuance of directions from London, and that all military
discipline would be subverted if they took upon themselves to direct his
plans.

In the meantime, Waller, raising the siege of Oxford, had gone in
pursuit of the king. Charles, seeing that his enemies were separated,
returned to Oxford, where he was received with great enthusiasm, and
the whole force there, marching out, fell upon Waller at Cropredy
Bridge, near Banbury, and defeated him. Having scattered the rebels
here, he turned his course west in pursuit of Essex, for his force was
sufficient to cope with either of the armies separately, although he had
been unable to meet them when united.

Harry and his father were not present at the battle of Cropredy Bridge,
having with their troops left Oxford on the approach of the Roundheads,
together with many other bodies of cavalry, as they could do no good in
the case of a siege, and were wanted in the north, where Rupert was on
his way to take the command. Joining his force, amounting in all to
twenty thousand men, they advanced toward York. Leaving the greater
portion of his army at a short distance away, Rupert entered York with
two thousand men. Newcastle was in favor of prudent steps, knowing that
dissensions existed in the Parliamentary army between the Scots and
their English allies. Prince Rupert, however, insisted that he had the
command of the king to fight at once, and so, with all the force he
could collect, advanced against the Scots. Newcastle was much offended
at the domineering manner and headstrong course of the prince and took
no part in the forthcoming battle, in which his military genius and
caution would have been of vast service to the royal cause.

On the 2d of July, having rested two days, the Royalist army marched out
against the Roundheads. The contending parties met on Marston Moor, and
it was late in the evening when the battle began. It was short but
desperate, and when it ended four thousand one hundred and fifty men had
been killed. Here, as in every other fight in which he was engaged, the
impetuosity of Prince Rupert proved the ruin of the Royalists. With his
cavaliers upon the right of the Royalist army, he charged the Scotch
horse, scattered them in every direction and rode after them, chasing
and slaying. The center of each army, composed of infantry, fought
desperately, and without much advantage to either side. But upon the
Royalist left the fate of the day was decided. There a new element was
introduced into the struggle, for the right of the Roundhead force was
commanded by Cromwell, who had raised and disciplined a body of cavalry
called the Ironsides. These men were all fanatics in religion and fought
with a sternness and vigor which carried all before them. In the eastern
counties they had already done great service; but this was the first
pitched battle at which they had been present. Their onslaught proved
irresistible. The Royalist cavalry upon the left were completely broken,
and the Roundhead horse then charged down upon the rear of the king's
infantry. Had Rupert rallied his men and performed the same service upon
the Parliament infantry, the battle might have been a drawn one; but,
intoxicated with victory, he was chasing the Scottish horse far away,
while Cromwell's Ironsides were deciding the fate of the battle. When he
returned to the field all was over. Fifteen hundred prisoners, all the
artillery, and more than a hundred banners had fallen into the hands of
the cavalry; and with the remnants of his army Prince Rupert retired
with all haste toward Chester, while Newcastle left York and embarked at
Scarborough for the Continent.

Colonel Furness' troop had been with the wing under Prince Rupert, and
deep indeed was their mortification when, upon returning to the field of
battle, they found that all was lost.

"Unless a very different discipline is introduced upon our side,"
Colonel Furness said to his son that night in York, "it is clear that
the king's cause is ruined. The Ironsides fight in a solid mass, and,
after having given a charge, they are ready at order to wheel about and
to deliver their attack wheresoever their general commands them. With
us, no sooner do we defeat the enemy than we break into confusion, each
man scatters in pursuit as if we were hunting a fox, and when at last we
draw rein, miles away from the battle, we ever find that upon our return
our footmen have been defeated. I fear much that Prince Rupert, with all
his bravery, is a hindrance rather than an aid to the Royal cause. His
counsels have always been on the side of resistance. He has supported
the king in his too obstinate insistance upon what he deems his rights,
while in the field his command is fatal to us. I fear, my boy, that the
struggle will end badly, and I foresee bad times for England, and for
all of us who have supported the cause of the king."

As the dispirited army marched back they received news which somewhat
raised their hearts. The king had marched after Essex into Cornwall, and
there had driven him into sore straits. He had endeavored to induce
Essex to make a general treaty of peace; but the earl replied that he
had no authority to treat, and that, even did he do so, the Parliament
would not submit to be bound by it. With a considerable portion of his
cavalry, he succeeded in passing through the Royal lines; but the whole
of the infantry under General Skippon were forced to capitulate, the
king giving them honorable terms, and requiring only the surrender of
the artillery, arms, and ammunition. The whole of the army returned as
scattered fugitives to London.

The king resolved again to march upon the capital. Montrose was now in
arms in Scotland, and had gained two considerable victories over the
Covenanters. The defeat at Marston had been outbalanced by the victories
over Waller and Essex, and the Scotch, alarmed by the successes of
Montrose, were ready to listen to terms, Steadily the king advanced
eastward, and at Newbury the armies again met. As upon the previous
occasion on that field, the battle led to no decisive results. Each side
fought stoutly, and at nightfall separated without achieving substantial
results. The king fell back upon Oxford, and the Parliament army upon
Readings and negotiations were once again renewed between king and
Parliament.




 

AN ESCAPE FROM PRISON.


There was no sadder or more gloomy face among the officers of the
Parliament than that of Herbert Rippinghall--sad, not from the sour
asceticism which distinguished the great portion of these officers, but
from his regrets over the struggle in which he was taking a part. While
Harry Furness saw much to find fault with in the conduct of many of his
fellows, and in the obstinacy with which the king refused to grant
concessions which might up to this time have restored peace to the land,
Herbert, on his side, was shocked at the violence and excessive demands
on the part of the Parliament, and at the rank hypocrisy which he saw
everywhere around him. Both lads still considered that the balance of
justice was on the side upon which they fought. But both, Herbert
perhaps because more thoughtful, therefore more strongly, saw that the
faults upon one side balanced those upon the other. Herbert had not
taken up the sword willingly, as Harry had done. He was by disposition
far less prone to adventure and more given to sober thought, and the
violence of his father and the bigoted opinions which he held had
repelled him from rather than attracted him toward the principles which
he advocated. When, however, the summons came from his father to join
him at Reading, with the rest of the hands employed in the business, he
did not hesitate. He still hoped that the pacific party in Parliament
would overcome the more violent, and that the tyranny of a small
minority toward which the country appeared to be drifting would be
nipped in the bud.

The divisions, indeed, in the Parliament were far greater than in the
councils of the king. Between the Independents and the Presbyterians a
wide gulf existed. The latter party, which was much the more numerous in
Parliament, and which had moreover the countenance and alliance of the
Scotch Presbyterians, viewed with the greatest jealousy the increasing
arrogance of the Independents and of the military party. They became
alarmed when they saw that they were rapidly drifting from the rule of
the king to that of Cromwell, and that while they themselves would be
satisfied with ample concessions and a certain amount of toleration, the
Independents were working for much more than this. Upon the Presbyterian
side, Lord Essex was regarded as their champion with the army, as
against Cromwell, Fairfax, and Ireton. So strong did the feeling become
that it was moved in the Commons "that no member of either House should,
during the war, enjoy or execute any office or command, civil or
military." A long and furious debate followed; but the ordinance was
passed by the Lower House, and went up to the Lords, and was finally
passed by them.

Now, however, occurred an episode which added greatly to the religious
hatred prevailing between the two parties, and shocked many of the
adherents of the Parliament by the wanton bigotry which it displayed.
Archbishop Laud had now lain for four years in prison, and by an
ordinance of Parliament, voted by only seven lords, he was condemned for
high treason, and was beheaded on the 10th of January. This cruel and
unnecessary murder showed only too plainly that the toleration which the
Dissenters had clamored for meant only toleration for themselves, and
intolerance toward all others; and a further example of this was given
by the passing of an ordinance forbidding the use of the Liturgy of the
Church of England in any place of worship in the country.

Rendered nervous by the increasing power of the Independents, the
majority in Parliament now determined to open fresh negotiations with
the king, and these offered a fairer prospect of peace than any which
had hitherto preceded them. Commissioners were appointed by Parliament
and by the king, and these met at Uxbridge, a truce being made for
twenty days. Had the king been endowed with any sense of the danger of
his position, or any desire to treat in a straightforward and honest
manner with his opponents, peace might now have been secured. But the
unfortunate monarch was seeking to cajole his foes rather than to treat
with them, and his own papers, afterward discovered, show too plainly
that the concessions which he offered were meant only to be kept so long
as it might please him. The twenty precious days were frittered away in
disputes. The king would grant one day concessions which he would
revoke the next. The victories which Montrose was gaining in the north
had roused his hopes, and the evil advice of his wife and Prince Rupert,
and the earnest remontrances which he received from Montrose against
surrendering to the demands of Parliament, overpowered the advice of his
wiser counselors. At the end of twenty days the negotiations ceased, and
the commissioners of Parliament returned to London, convinced that there
was no hope of obtaining a permanent peace with a man so vacillating and
insincere as the king.

Herbert had been with his father at Uxbridge, as the regiment of foot to
which he belonged was on guard here, and it was with a heavy heart that
he returned to London, convinced that the war must go on, but forboding
as great a disaster to the country in the despotism which he saw the
Independents would finally establish as in the despotism of King
Charles.

There was a general gloom in the city when the news of the unsuccessful
termination of the negotiations became known. The vast majority of the
people were eagerly desirous of peace. The two years which the war had
already lasted had brought nothing save ruin to trade and general
disaster, and the great body of the public who were not tinged with the
intense fanaticism of the Independents, and who did not view all
pleasure and enjoyment in life as sinful, longed for the merry old days
when Englishmen might smile without being accused of sin, and when life
was not passed solely in prayer and exhortation. Several small riots had
broken out in London; but these were promptly suppressed. Among the
'prentice boys, especially, did the spirit of revolt against the gloomy
asceticism of the time prevail, and there can be little doubt that if at
this period, or for a long time subsequent, the king could have appeared
suddenly in the city at the head of a few score troops, he would have
been welcomed with acclamation, and the great body of the citizens would
have rallied round him.

When the Parliament commissioners reached London Fairfax received his
commission as sole general of the army. The military services of
Cromwell were of such importance that Fairfax and his officers urged
that an exception should be made to the ordinance in his case, and that
he should be temporarily appointed lieutenant-general and chief
commander of horse. The moderate party yielded to the demand of the
Independents. The Earls of Essex, Manchester, and Denbigh gave in their
resignations. Many of the more moderate advisers of Charles also
retired to their estates, despairing of a conflict in which the king's
obstinacy admitted of no hope of a favorable termination. They, too,
had, as much perhaps as the members of the recalcitrant Parliament,
hoped for reforms; but it was clear that the king would never consent to
reign except as an absolute monarch, and for this they were unprepared.
The violent party among the Cavaliers now ruled supreme in the councils
of Charles. For a short time the royal cause seemed in the ascendant.
Leicester had been taken by storm, Taunton was besieged, Fairfax was
surrounding Oxford, but was doing nothing against the town. On the 5th
of June he was ordered to raise the siege, and to go to the Midland
counties after the royal army. On the 13th Fairfax and Cromwell joined
their forces, and pursued the king, whom they overtook the next day near
Naseby.

Herbert had accompanied the army of Fairfax, and seeing the number and
resolution of the troops, he hoped that a victory might be gained which
would terminate for good and all this disastrous conflict. The ground
round Naseby is chiefly moorland. The king's army was drawn up a mile
from Market Harborough. Prince Rupert commanded the left wing, Sir
Marmaduke Langdale the right, Lord Ashley the main body. Fairfax
commanded the center of the Roundheads, with General Skippon under him.
Cromwell commanded the right and Ireton the left. Rupert had hurried on
with his horse in advance, and coming upon the Roundheads, at once
engaged them. So sudden was the attack that neither party had formed its
lines for battle, and the artillery was in the rear. Between the armies
lay a wide level known as Broadmoor. It was across this that Rupert had
ridden, and charging up the hill on the other side, fell upon the left
wing of Fairfax. Cromwell, upon the other hand, from the extreme right
charged down the hill upon Langdale's squadrons. Prince Rupert, as
usual, carried all before him. Shouting his battle cry, "Queen Mary," he
fell upon Ireton's left wing, and drove them from the field, chasing
them back to Naseby, where, as usual, he lost time in capturing the
enemy's baggage. Cromwell, with his Ironsides, upon the other hand, had
broken Langdale's horse and driven them from the field. In the center
the fight was hot. The king's foot had come up the hill and poured
volley after volley into the parliament ranks. Hand to hand the infantry
were fighting, and gradually the Roundheads were giving way. But now, as
at Marston, Cromwell, keeping his Ironsides well in hand, returned from
the defeat of Langdale's horse, and fell upon the rear of the Royalists.
Fairfax rallied his men as he saw the horse coming up to his assistance.
Rupert's troopers were far from the field, and a panic seizing the
king's reserve of horse, who had they charged might have won the day,
the Earl of Carnewarth, taking hold of King Charles' horse, forced him
from the field, and the battle ended, with the complete defeat of the
royal troops, before Rupert returned to the field of battle.

The Royalists lost in killed and prisoners five thousand men, their
twelve guns, and all their baggage train, and what was of even greater
importance, the king's private cabinet, which contained documents which
did more to precipitate his ruin even than the defeat of his army. Here
were found letters proving that while he had professed his desire to
treat, he had no intention of giving way in the slightest degree. Here
were copies of letters to foreign princes asking for aid, and to the
Papists in Ireland, promising all kinds of concessions if they would
rise in his favor. Not only did the publication of this correspondence
and of the private letters between the king and queen add to the
indignation of the Commons and to their determination to fight to the
bitterest end, but it disgusted and alienated a vast number of Royalists
who had hitherto believed in the king and trusted to his royal word.

Among the prisoners taken at Naseby was Harry Furness, whose troop had
been with Langdale's horse, and who, his charger having been shot, had
fallen upon the field, his head being cut by the sweep of the sword of a
Roundhead soldier, who struck at him as he was lying on the ground. Soon
after the battle, when it became known what prisoners had been taken, he
was visited by his friend Herbert.

"We are changing sides, Herbert," Harry said, with a faint smile. "The
last time we met you were nigh falling into the hands of the Royalists,
now I have altogether fallen into yours."

"Yes, and unfortunately," Herbert said, "I cannot repeat your act of
generosity. However, Harry, I trust that with this great battle the war
is nearly over, and that all prisoners now taken will speedily be
released. At any rate, I need not assure you that you will have my aid
and assistance in any matter."

The Parliamentary leaders did not allow the grass to grow under their
feet after Naseby. Prince Rupert, with considerable force, had marched
to Bristol, and Fairfax and Cromwell followed him there. A considerable
portion of the prisoners were sent to London, but some were retained
with the army. Among these was Harry Furness, whom it was intended to
confine with many others in some sure place in the south. Under a guard
they were conducted to Reading, where they were for awhile to be kept.
Essex and Cromwell advanced to Bristol, which they surrounded; and
Prince Rupert, after a brave defense, was forced to capitulate, upon
terms similar to those which had been granted by the king to the army
of Lord Essex the year before. In his conduct of the siege the prince
had certainly not failed. But this misfortune aroused the king's anger
more than the faults which had done such evil service on the fields of
Naseby and Marston, and he wrote to the prince, ordering him to leave
the kingdom at once.

It would have been well had King Charles here ceased the struggle, for
the cause of the Royalists was now hopeless. Infatuated to the last,
however, and deeming ever that the increasing contentions and ill-will
between the two parties in Parliament would finally end by one of them
bidding for the Royal support, and agreeing to his terms, the king
continued the contest. Here and there isolated affrays took place;
risings in Kent and other counties occurring, but being defeated
summarily by the vigor of Fairfax and his generals.

The time passed but slowly with Harry at Reading. He and his
fellow-prisoners were assigned quarters in a large building, under the
guard of a regiment of Parliament troops. Their imprisonment was not
rigorous. They were fairly fed and allowed exercise in a large courtyard
which adjoined the house. The more reckless spirits sang, jested, wrote
scurrilous songs on the Roundheads, and passed the time as cheerfully as
might be. Harry, however, with the restlessness of his age, longed for
liberty. He knew that Prince Charles was in command of the army in the
west, and he longed to join him and try once more the fortunes of
battle. The guard set round the building was close and vigilant, and the
chances of escape appeared small. Still, Harry thought that if he could
escape from an upper window on a dark night he could surely make his way
through the line of sentries. He had observed on moonlight nights the
exact position which each of these occupied. The intervals were short
between them; but it would be quite possible on a dark night for a
person to pass noiselessly without being perceived. The watch would have
been even more strict than it was, had not the Puritans regarded the
struggle as virtually at an end, and were, therefore, less careful as to
their prisoners than they would otherwise have been. Harry prepared for
escape by tearing up the blankets of his bed and knotting them into
ropes. A portion he wrapped round his shoes, so as to walk noiselessly,
and taking advantage of a dark, moonless night, when the fog hung thick
upon the low land round Reading, he opened his window, threw out his
rope, and slipped down to the ground.

So dark was the fog that it was difficult for him to see two paces in
advance, and he soon found that the careful observations which he had
taken of the place of the sentries would be altogether useless. Still,
in the darkness and thickness of the night, he thought that the chance
of detection was small. Creeping quietly and noiselessly along, he could
hear the constant challenges of the sentries round him. These, excited
by the unusual darkness of the night, were unusually vigilant. Harry
approached until he was within a few yards of the line, and the voices
of the men as they challenged enabled him to ascertain exactly the
position of those on the right and left of him. Passing between these,
he could see neither, although they were but a few paces on either hand,
and he would have got off unobserved had he not suddenly fallen into a
deep stream running across his way, and which in the darkness he did not
see until he fell into it. At the sound there was an instant challenge,
and then a piece was discharged. Harry struggled across the stream, and
clambered out on the opposite side. As he did so a number of muskets
were fired in his direction by the men who came rushing up to the point
of alarm. One ball struck him in the shoulder. The rest whizzed
harmlessly by, and at the top of his speed he ran forward.

He was now safe from pursuit, for in the darkness of the night it would
have been absolutely impossible to follow him. In a few minutes he
ceased running, for when all became quiet behind him, he could no longer
tell in what direction he was advancing. So long as he could hear the
shouts of the sentries he continued his way, and then, all guidance
being lost, he lay down under a hedge and waited for morning. It was
still thick and foggy; but wandering aimlessly about for some time, he
succeeded at last in striking upon a road, and judging from the side
upon which he had entered it in which direction Reading must lie, he
took the western way and went forward. The ball had passed only through
the fleshy part of his shoulder, missing the bone; and although it
caused him much pain, he was able, by wrapping his arm tightly to his
body, to proceed. More than once he had to withdraw from the road into
the fields beyond, when he heard troops of horse galloping along.

After a long day's walk he arrived near Abingdon, and there made for the
hall. Instead of going to the door he made for the windows, and, looking
in, saw a number of Roundhead soldiers in the hall, and knew that there
was no safety for him. As he glanced in one of the soldiers happened to
cast his eyes up, and gave a shout on seeing a figure looking in at the
window. Instantly the rest sprang to their feet, and started out to
secure the intruder. Harry fled along the road, and soon reached
Abingdon. He had at first thought of making for one of his father's
farms; but he felt sure that here also Roundhead troops would be
quartered. After a moment's hesitation he determined to make for Mr.
Rippinghall's. He knew the premises accurately, and thought that he
might easily take refuge in the warehouses, in which large quantities of
wool were wont to be stored. The streets were deserted, for it was now
late at night, and he found his way without interruption to the
wool-stapler's. Here he climbed over a wall, made his way into the
warehouse, and clambering over a large number of bales, laid himself
down next to the wall, secure from any casual observation. Here he went
off to sleep, and it was late next day before he opened his eyes. He was
nearly uttering an exclamation at the pain which his movement on waking
gave to his wounded arm. He, however, repressed it, and it was well he
did so, as he heard voices in the warehouse. Men were removing bales of
wool, and for some hours this process went on. Harry, being well back,
had little fear that he should be disturbed.

The hours passed wearily. He was parched and feverish from the pain of
his wound, and was unable to deliberate as to his best course. Sometimes
he dozed off into snatches of sleep, and after one of these he found
that the warehouse was again silent, and that darkness had set in. He
determined to wait at least for another day, and also that he would
early in the morning look out from the window before the men entered, in
hopes that he might catch sight of his old playfellow, Lucy, who would,
he felt sure, bring him some water and refreshment if she were able.
Accordingly, in the morning, he took his place so as to command a view
of the garden, and presently to his great surprise he saw Herbert, whom
he had believed with the army, come out together with Lucy. They had not
taken four paces in the garden when their attention was attracted by a
tap at the window, and looking up, they were astonished at beholding
Harry's pale face there. With an exclamation of surprise they hurried
into the warehouse.

"My dear Harry," Herbert exclaimed, "how did you get here? The troops
have been searching for you high and low. Your escape from Reading was
bruited abroad a few hours after it took place, and the party at the
hall having reported seeing some one looking in at the window, there was
no doubt felt that you had gained this neighborhood, and a close watch
has been kept. All your father's farms have been carefully examined, and
their occupants questioned, and the general belief is that you are still
hidden somewhere near."

"I got a ball through my shoulder," Harry said, "in making my way
through the sentries, and have felt myself unable to travel until I
could obtain some food. I thought that I should be safer from search
here, and believing you were away in the army, thought that your sister
would perhaps be moved by compassion to aid her old playfellow."

"Yes, indeed," the girl said; "I would have done anything for you,
Harry. To think of your being hidden so close to us, while we were
sleeping quietly. I will at once get you some food, and then you and
Herbert can talk over what is best to be done."

So saying she ran into the house, and returned in a few minutes with a
bowl of milk and some freshly made cakes, which Harry drank and ate
ravenously. In the meantime, he was discussing with Herbert what was the
best course to pursue.

"It would not be safe," Herbert said, "for you to try and journey
further at present. The search for you is very keen, and it happens,
unfortunately, that the officer in command here is the very man whose
face you sliced when he came to Furness Hall some two years back. It
would be a bad thing for you were you to fall into his hands."

Lucy at first proposed that Harry should be taken into the house, and
go at once to bed. She and Herbert would then give out that a friend had
arrived from a distance, who was ill, and, waiting upon him themselves,
should prevent suspicion being attracted. This, however, Herbert did not
think would be safe. It would be asked when the inmate had arrived, and
who he was, and why the servants should not, as usual, attend upon him.

"I think," he said, "that if to-night I go forth, having said at dinner
in the hearing of the servant that I am expecting a friend from London,
you can then join me outside, and return with me. You must crop off
those long ringlets of yours, and turn Roundhead for the nonce. I can
let you have a sober suit which was made for me when I was in London,
and which has not yet been seen by my servants. I can say that you are
in bad health, and this will enable you to remain at home, sleeping upon
a couch to nurse your shoulder."

"The shoulder is of no consequence," Harry said. "A mere flesh wound
like that would not detain me away from the saddle. It is only the
fatigue and loss of blood, together with want of food, which has
weakened me."

As no other course presented itself this was followed. Harry remained
during the day in his place of concealment in the warehouse, and at
nightfall went out, and, being joined by Herbert, returned with him to
the house. The door was opened by Lucy and he entered unperceived by the
domestics. The first operation was to cut off the whole of his hair
close to his head. He was then attired in Herbert's clothes, and looked,
as Lucy told him, a quiet and decent young gentleman. Then he took his
place on a couch in the sitting-room, and Herbert rung for supper, which
he had ordered to be prepared for a guest as well as for Lucy and
himself.




 

PUBLIC EVENTS.


For some days Harry remained quietly with his friend. He did not stir
beyond the door, although he had but little fear of any of his old
friends recognizing him. The two years which had passed since he was at
school had greatly changed his appearance, and his closely-cut hair, and
the somber and Puritanical cut of his garments so completely altered him
that it would have been a keen eye indeed which had recognized him when
merely passing in the street. A portion of each day he spent out in the
garden strolling with Lucy, or sitting quietly while she read to him.
The stiffness in his arm was now abating, and as the search for him had
to a great extent ceased, he intended in a short time to make for
Oxford.

The news from the various points at which the conflict still continued
was everywhere disastrous for the king. Montrose had been defeated. The
king, endeavoring to make his way north to join him, had been smartly
repulsed. The Royalists were everywhere disorganized and broken.
Negotiations were once again proceeding, and as the Scottish army was
marching south, and the affairs of the crown seemed desperate, there was
every hope that the end of the long struggle was approaching. Harry's
departure was hastened by a letter received by Herbert from his father,
saying that he had obtained leave from his regiment, and should be down
upon the following day.

"My father will not blame me," Herbert said, "for what I have done, when
he comes to know it. But I am not sure that he would himself approve of
your remaining here. His convictions are so earnest, and his sense of
duty so strong, that I do not think he would harbor his nearest
relative, did he believe him to be in favor of the king."

Harry next morning mounted a horse of Herbert's and started to ride from
the town, after taking an affectionate farewell of his hosts. When two
miles out of Abingdon he suddenly came upon a body of Parliament horse,
in the leader of whom he recognized, by a great scar across his face,
the officer with whom he had fallen out at Furness Hall. Relying upon
his disguise, and upon the fact that it was only for a minute that the
officer had seen him, he rode quietly on.

"Whom have we here?" the Roundhead said, reining in his horse.

"My name is Roger Copley, and I am making my way from London to my
people, who reside in the west. There is no law, I believe, against my
so doing."

"There is no law for much that is done or undone," the Roundhead said.
"Malignants are going about the country in all sorts of disguises,
stirring up men to ungodly enterprises, and we cannot be too particular
whom we let pass. What hast thou been doing in London?"

"I have been serving my time as apprentice to Master Nicholas Fleming,
the merchant in velvets and silks in the Chepe."

"Hast thou any papers to prove thy identity?"

"I have not," Harry said; "not knowing that such were needed. I have
traveled thus far without interruption or question, and am surprised to
find hindrance upon the part of an officer of the Commons."

"You must turn your horse, and ride back with me into Abingdon," the
officer said. "I doubt me much that you are as you pretend to be.
However, it is a matter which we can bring to the proof."

Harry wondered to himself of what proof the matter was capable. But
without a word he turned his horse's head toward Abingdon. Scarcely a
word was spoken on the way, and Harry was meditating whether he should
say that he had been staying with his friend Herbert. But thinking that
this might lead the latter into trouble, he determined to be silent on
that head. They stopped at the door of the principal trader in the town
and the captain roughly told his prisoner to alight and enter with him.

"Master Williamson," he said, "bring out some pieces of velvet. This
man, whom I suspect to be a Cavalier in disguise, saith that he has been
an apprentice to Master Nicholas Fleming, a velvet dealer of London. I
would fain see how far his knowledge of these goods extends. Bring out
five or six pieces of various qualities, and put them upon your table
promiscuously, and not in order of value."

The mercer did as requested.

"These goods," he said, "were obtained from Master Fleming himself. I
bought them last year, and have scarce sold a piece of such an article
since."

Harry felt rather nervous at the thought of being obliged to distinguish
between the velvets, for although he had received some hints and
instructions from the merchant, he knew that the appearance of one kind
of velvet differed but slightly from that of the inferior qualities. To
his satisfaction, however, he saw at the end of the rolls the pieces of
paper intact upon which Master Fleming's private marks were placed.

"I need not," he said, "look at the velvets, for I see my master's
private marks upon them, and can of course tell you their value at
once."

So saying, from the private marks he read off the value of each roll of
velvet per yard, and as these tallied exactly with the amount which the
mercer had paid for them, no further doubts remained upon the mind of
the officer.

"These marks," he said to the mercer, "are, I suppose, private, and
could not be read save by one in the merchant's confidence?"

"That is so," the mercer replied. "I myself am in ignorance of the
meaning of these various symbols."

"You will forgive me," the Parliament officer said to Harry. "In these
times one cannot be too suspicious, and even the best friends of the
Commons need not grudge a little delay in their journeyings, in order
that the doings of the malignants may be arrested."

Harry in a few words assured the officer that he bore him no malice for
his arrest, and that, indeed, his zeal in the cause did him credit. Then
again mounting his horse, he quietly rode out of Abingdon. This time he
met with no difficulties, and an hour later entered Oxford.

Here he found his father and many of his acquaintances. A great change
had come over the royal city. The tone of boastfulness and anticipated
triumph which had pervaded it before the second battle of Newbury had
now entirely disappeared. Gloom was written upon all faces, and few
entertained any hopes of a favorable termination to their cause. Here a
year passed slowly and heavily. The great proportion of Sir Henry
Furness' troop were allowed to return to their farms, as at present
there was no occasion for their services in the field.

All this time the king was negotiating and treating; the Parliament
quarreling furiously among themselves. The war had languished
everywhere. In the west a rising had been defeated by the Parliament
troops. The Prince of Wales had retired to France; and there was now no
force which could be called an army capable of taking the field.

The bitterness of the conflict had for a long time ceased; and in the
general hope that peace was at hand, the rancor of Cavalier against
Roundhead softened down, A great many of the adherents of Charles
returned quietly to their homes, and here they were allowed to settle
down without interruption.

The contrast between this state of things and that which prevailed in
Scotland was very strong, and has been noted by more than one historian.
In England men struggled for principle, and, having fought the battle
out, appeared to bear but little animosity to each other, and returned
each to his own pursuits unmolested and unharmed. In Scotland, upon the
other hand, after the defeat of Montrose, large numbers of prisoners
were executed in cold blood, and sanguinary persecutions took place.

In Parliament the disputes between the Independents and Presbyterians
grew more and more bitter, the latter being strengthened by the presence
of the Scotch army in England. They were greatly in the majority in
point of numbers; but the Independents made up for their numerical
weakness by the violence of their opinions, and by the support of the
army, which was entirely officered by men of extreme views.

The king, instead of frankly dealing with the Commons, now that his
hopes in the field were gone, unhappily continued his intrigues, hoping
that an open breach would take place between the parties. On the 5th of
December he wrote to the speaker of the House of Lords, offering to send
a deputation to Westminster with propositions for the foundation of a
happy and well-grounded peace. This offer was declined, and he again
wrote, offering himself to proceed to Westminster to treat in person.
The leaders of Parliament, and indeed with reason, suspected the
sincerity of the king. Papers had been found in the carriage of the
Catholic Archbishop of Tuam, who was killed in a skirmish in October,
proving that the king had concluded an alliance with the Irish rebels,
and that he had agreed, if they would land ten thousand men in England,
that popery should be re-established in Ireland, and the Protestants
brought under subjection. Letters which have since been discovered prove
that in January, 1646, while urging upon the Parliament to come to
terms, he was writing to the queen, saying that he was only deceiving
them. In his letter he said:

"Now, as to points which I expected by my treaty at London. Knowing
assuredly the great animosity which is betwixt the Independents and
Presbyterians, I had great reason to hope that one of the factions would
so address themselves to me that I might, without great difficulty,
obtain my so just ends, and, questionless, it would have given me the
fittest opportunity. For considering the Scots' treaty that would be
besides, I might have found means to put distractions among them, though
I had found none."

Such being the spirit that animated the king, there is little reason for
surprise that the negotiations came to nothing. The last hope of the
crown was destroyed when, on the 22d of March, Lord Astley, marching
from Worcester to join the king at Oxford, was defeated at Stow, in the
Wold, and the three thousand Cavaliers with him killed, captured, or
dispersed. Again the king sent a message to Parliament, offering to come
to Whitehall, and proposing terms similar to those which he had rejected
when the negotiators met at Uxbridge. His real object, however, was to
produce such an effect by his presence in London as would create a
reaction in his favor. Three days after he had sent this message he
wrote to Digby:

"I am endeavoring to get to London, so that the conditions may be such
as a gentleman may own, and that the rebels may acknowledge me king,
being not without hope that I shall be able so to draw either the
Presbyterians or Independents to side with me for exterminating the one
or the other, that I shall be really king again."

These offers were rejected by Parliament, and the army of Fairfax
advanced toward Oxford. In the meanwhile, Montreuil, a special
ambassador from France, had been negotiating with the Scottish
commissioners in London to induce the Scots to take up the cause of the
king. He then proceeded to Edinburgh, and afterward to the Scotch army.
At first the Scotch were willing to receive him; but they perceived the
danger which would be involved in a quarrel with the English Parliament.
Already there were many causes of dispute. The army had not received the
pay promised them when they marched south, and being without money had
been obliged to live upon the country, creating great disorders and
confusion, and rendering themselves bitterly hated by the people. Thus
their answers continued to be ambiguous, making no absolute promise, but
yet giving a sort of encouragement to the king to place himself in their
hands.

Toward the end of April Fairfax was drawing so close around Oxford that
the king felt that hesitation was no longer possible, and accompanied
only by his chaplain, Dr. Michael Hudson, and by a groom of his
bedchamber, named Jack Ashburnham, he left Oxford at night, and after
many adventures arrived at the Scotch army, before Newark, where upon
his arrival "many lords came instantly to wait on his majesty, with
professions of joy to find that he had so far honored their army as to
think it worthy his presence after so long an opposition." Lord Leven,
however, who commanded the Scotch army, while receiving the king with
professions of courtesy and honor, yet gave him to understand that he
must in some way consider himself as a prisoner. The king, at the
request of the Scotch, signed an order to his governor of Newark, who
had been for months bravely holding out, to surrender the place, and
this having been done, the Scottish army with the king marched to
Newcastle.

After the king's surrender to the Scotch the civil war virtually ceased,
although many places still held out. Oxford, closely invested,
maintained itself until the 22d of June, when it capitulated to Fairfax,
upon the terms that the garrison "should march out of the city of Oxford
with their horses and complete arms that properly belong under them
proportionable to their present or past commands, flying colors,
trumpets sounding, drums beating, matches alight at both ends, bullets
in their mouths, and every soldier to have twelve charges of powder,
match and bullet proportionable." Those who desired to go to their
houses or friends were to lay down their arms within fifteen miles of
Oxford, and then to have passes, with the right of free quarter, and
those who wished to go across the sea to serve any foreign power were to
be allowed to do so. This surrender was honorable to both parties, and
upon the city being given up, the garrison marched out, and then
scattered to their various houses and counties, without let or
molestation from the troops of the Commons.

Harry Furness and his father had not far to go. They were soon installed
in their old house, where although some confusion prevailed owing to its
having been frequently in the occupation of bodies of Parliament troops,
yet the damage done was not serious, and in a short time it was
restored to its former condition. Several of the more valuable articles
were allowed to remain in the hiding-places in which they had been
concealed, as none could yet say how events might finally turn out. A
portion of the Parliamentary troops were also disbanded, and allowed to
return to their homes; among these were Master Rippinghall and his son,
and for some months matters went on at Abingdon as if the civil war had
never been. Harry often saw his friend Herbert; but so long as the king
remained in a doubtful position in the army of the Scots, no close
intercourse could take place between members of parties so opposed to
each other.

The time went slowly with Harry, for after the past three years of
excitement it was difficult to settle down to a quiet life at Furness
Hall. He was of course too old now for schooling, and the times were yet
too disturbed for men to engage in the field sports which occupy so
large a portion of country life. Colonel Furness, indeed, had determined
that in no case would he again take up arms. He was discontented with
the whole course of events, and foresaw that, with the unhappy temper of
the king, no favorable issue could possibly be looked for. He had done
his best, he said, for the crown and would do no more. He told his son,
however, that he should place no rein upon his inclinations should he
choose to meddle further in the matter. Harry would fain have gone
abroad, whither so many of the leading Cavaliers had already betaken
themselves, and entered the service of some foreign court for a few
years. But his father dissuaded him from this, at any rate for the
present.

"These delays and negotiations," he said, "cannot last forever. I care
not whether Presbyterians or Independents get the power over our
unhappy country. The Independents are perhaps the more bigoted; the
Presbyterians the more intolerant. But as the latter would certainly
respect the royal authority more than the former, whose rage appears to
me to pass the bounds of all moderation, I would gladly see the
Presbyterians obtain the upper hand."

For months the negotiations dragged wearily on, the king, as usual,
maintaining an indecisive attitude between the two parties. At length,
however, the negotiations ended in a manner which brought an eternal
disgrace upon the Scotch, for they agreed, upon the receipt of a large
sum of money as the deferred pay of the army, to deliver the king into
the hands of the English Parliament. A great convoy of money was sent
down from London, and the day that the cash was in the hands of the
Scots they handed over the king to the Parliamentary commissioners sent
down to receive him. The king was conducted to Holmby House, a fine
mansion within six miles of Northampton, and there was at first treated
with great honor. A large household and domestic servants were chosen
for him, an excellent stable kept, and the king was allowed a large
amount of personal liberty. The nobles and gentlemen of his court were
permitted to see him, and in fact he was apparently restored to his rank
and estate. The Presbyterian party were in power; but while they treated
the king with the respect due to his exalted station, they had no more
regard to the rights of his conscience than to those of the consciences
of the people at large. He desired to have chaplains of the Episcopal
church; but the Parliament refused this, and sent him two Presbyterian
ministers, whom the king refused to receive.

While King Charles remained at Holmby Parliament quarreled furiously.
The spirit of the Independents obtained a stronger and stronger hold
upon the army. Cromwell himself, with a host of others, preached
daily among them, and this general, although Fairfax was the
commander-in-chief, came gradually to be regarded as the leader of the
army. There can be no doubt that Cromwell was thoroughly sincere in his
convictions, and the charges of hypocrisy which have been brought
against him, are at least proved to be untrue. He was a man of
convictions as earnest as those of the king himself, and as firmly
resolved to override the authority of the Parliament, when the
Parliament withstood him.

Three days after the king arrived at Holmby House the Commons voted that
the army should be disbanded, with the exception of troops required for
the suppression of rebellion in Ireland, and for the service of the
garrisons. It was also voted that there should be no officers, except
Fairfax, of higher rank than colonel, and that every officer should take
the covenant and conform to the Presbyterian Church. A loan was raised
in the city to pay off a portion of the arrears of pay due to the army.
The sum, however, was insufficient, and there were great murmurings
among the men and officers. Fourteen of the latter petitioned Parliament
on the subject of arrears, asking that auditors should be appointed to
report on what was due to them, and laying down some conditions with
regard to their employment in Ireland. Five days afterward the House, on
receipt of this petition, declared that whoever had a hand in promoting
it, or any other such petition, was an enemy to the State, and a
disturber of the public peace. The army were furious at this
declaration. Deputations from them went to the House, and from the House
to the army. The Presbyterian members were highly indignant at their
pretensions, and Cromwell saw that the time was at hand when the army
would take the affair entirely into their hands. The soldiers organized
a council of delegates, called "Adjutators," to look after their rights.
The Parliament voted eight weeks' pay, and a committee went to the army
to see it disbanded. The army declined to disband, and said that eight
times eight weeks' pay was due. The feeling grew hotter and hotter, and
the majority in Parliament came to the conclusion that Cromwell should
be arrested. Cromwell, however, obtained word of what was intended, and
left London.

Upon the same day a party of soldiers went down to Holmby, and forcibly
carried off King Charles from the Parliamentary commissioners, the
troops stationed at Holmby fraternizing with their comrades. The king,
under the charge of these new guards, arrived at Royston on the 7th of
June, and Fairfax and Cromwell met him there. He asked if they had
commissioned Joyce, who was at the head of the party of men who had
carried him off, to remove him. They denied that they had done so.

"I shall not believe you," said the king, "unless you hang him."

And his majesty had good ground for his disbelief.

Cromwell returned to London and took his place in the House, and there
blamed the soldiers, protesting that he would stick to the Parliament;
but the same night he went away again down to the army, and there
declared to them the actions and designs of Parliament. Commissioners
came down on the 10th from the Commons; but the army formed up, and when
the votes were read, refused to obey them. The same afternoon a letter,
signed by Fairfax, Cromwell, Ireton, and ten other officers, was sent to
the city, stating that they were about to advance upon London, and
declaring that if the city did not take part against them "in their just
desires to resist that wicked party which would embroil us and the
kingdom, neither we nor our soldiers shall give you the least offense."
The army marched to St. Albans, and thence demanded the impeachment of
eleven members of the Commons, all leading Presbyterians. The city and
Parliament were in a state of consternation. The army advanced to
Uxbridge. It demanded a month's pay, and received it; but it continued
to advance. On the 26th of April Parliament gave way. The eleven members
retired from the House, the Commons passed a vote approving of the
proceedings of the army, and commissioners were appointed.

All this time the king was treated as honorably as he had been when at
Holmby House. He was always lodged at great houses in the neighborhood
of the army--at the Earl of Salisbury's, at Hatfield, when the troops
were at St. Albans, and at the Earl of Craven's, at Caversham, when the
army moved further back. And at both of these places he was allowed to
receive the visits of his friends, and to spend his time as he desired.

More critical times were now, however, at hand.




 

LAST ATTEMPT TO RESCUE THE KING.


The king, after London had been overawed by the army, was lodged in
Hampton Court. At this time the feeling throughout England was growing
stronger and stronger in favor of the re-establishment of the monarchy,
It was now a year since, with the fall of Oxford, the civil war had
virtually concluded, and people yearned for a settled government and a
return to ancient usages and manners. The great majority of that very
Parliament which had withstood and conquered Charles were of one mind
with the people in general; but England was no longer free to choose for
itself. The army had won the victory for the Commons, and was determined
to impose its will upon the nation. At this time Cromwell, Ireton, and
Fairfax were disposed to an arrangement, but their authority was
overshadowed by that of the preachers, who, in their harangues to the
troops, denounced these generals as traitors, and then finding that they
were likely to lose their influence, and to become obnoxious to both
parties, henceforth threw their lot in with the army, and headed it in
its struggle with the Parliament. Even yet the long misfortunes which
Charles had suffered were insufficient to teach him wisdom. Had he now
heartily thrown himself into the hands of the moderate majority in
Parliament he might--aided by them and by the Scots, who, seeing that
the Independents were ignoring all the obligations which had been
undertaken by the Solemn League and government, were now almost openly
hostile to the party of the army--have again mounted the throne, amid
the joyful acclamations of the whole country. The army would have
fought, but Charles, with England at his back, would assuredly have
conquered. Unfortunately, the king could not be honest. His sole idea of
policy was to set one section of his opponents against the other. He
intrigued at once with the generals and with the Parliament, and had the
imprudence to write continually to the queen and others, avowing that he
was deceiving both. Several of these letters were intercepted, and
although desirous of playing off the king against the army, the Commons
felt that they could place no trust in him whatever; while the preachers
and the army clamored more and more loudly that he should be brought to
trial as a traitor.

Harry Furness had, after the fall of Oxford, remained quietly with his
father at Furness Hall. Once or twice only had he gone up to London,
returning with reports that the people there were becoming more and more
desirous of the restoration of the king to his rights. The great
majority were heartily sick of the rule of the preachers, with their
lengthy exhortations, their sad faces, and their abhorrence of amusement
of all kinds. There had been several popular tumults, in which the old
cry of "God save the king," had again been raised. The apprentices were
ready to join in any movement which might bring back the pleasant times
of old. Cavaliers now openly showed themselves in the streets, and
London was indeed ripe for an insurrection against the sovereignty which
the army had established over the nation. Had the king at this time
escaped from Hampton Court, and ridden into London at the head of only
twenty gentlemen, and issued a proclamation appealing to the loyalty of
the citizens, and promising faithfully to preserve the rights of the
people, and to govern constitutionally, he would have been received with
acclamation. The majority of Parliament would have declared for him,
England would have received the news with delight, and the army alone
would not have sufficed to turn the tide against him. Unhappily for
Charles, he had no more idea now than at the commencement of the war of
governing constitutionally, and instead thinking of trusting himself to
the loyalty and affection of his subjects, he was meditating an escape
to France. Harry received a letter from one of the king's most attached
adherents, who was in waiting upon him at Hampton, begging him to repair
there at once, as his majesty desired the aid of a few of those upon
whom he could best rely, for an enterprise which he was about to
undertake. Harry showed the letter to his father.

"You must do as you will, Harry," the colonel said. "For myself, I stick
to my determination to meddle no more in the broils of this kingdom.
Could I trust his Majesty, I would lay down my life for him willingly;
but I cannot trust him. All the misfortunes which have befallen him, all
the blood which has been poured out by loyal men in his cause, all the
advice which his best councilors have given him, have been thrown away
upon him. He is as lavish with his promises as ever, but all the time he
is intending to break them as soon as he gets ample chance. Were he
seated upon the throne again to-morrow, he would be as arbitrary as he
was upon the day he ascended it. I do not say that I would not far
rather see England under the tyranny of one man than under that of an
army of ambitious knaves; but the latter cannot last. The king's
authority, once riveted again on the necks of the people, might enslave
them for generations, but England will never submit long to the yoke of
military dictators. The evil is great, but it will right itself in
time. But do you do as you like, Harry. You have, I hope, a long life
before you, and 'twere best that you chose your own path in it. But
think it over, my son. Decide nothing to-night, and in the morning let
me know what you have determined."

Harry slept but little that night. When he met his father at breakfast
he said:

"I have decided, father. You know that my opinions run with yours as to
the folly of the king, and the wrongfulness and unwisdom of his policy.
Still he is alone, surrounded by traitors to whose ambition he is an
obstacle, and who clamor for his blood. I know not upon what enterprise
he may now be bent, but methinks that it must be that he thinks of an
escape from the hands of his jailers. If so, he must meditate a flight
to France. There he will need faithful followers, who will do their best
to make him feel that he is still a king who will cheer his exile and
sustain his hopes. It may be that years will pass before England shakes
off the iron yoke which Cromwell and his army are placing upon her neck.
But, as you say, I am young and can wait. There are countries in Europe
where a gentleman can take service in the army, and should aught happen
to King Charles there I will enroll myself until these evil days be all
passed. I would rather never see England again than live here to be
ruled by King Cromwell and his canting Ironsides."

"So be it, my son," the colonel said. "I do not strive to dissuade you,
for methinks had I been of your age I should have chosen the same.
Should your fortunes lead you abroad, as they likely will, I shall send
you a third of my income here. The rest will be ample for me. There will
be little feasting or merriment at Furness Hall until the cloud which
overshadows England be passed away, and you be again by my side. There
is little fear of my being disturbed. Those who laid down their arms
when the war ceased were assured of the possession of their property,
and as I shall draw sword no more there will be no excuse for the
Roundheads to lay hands on Furness Hall. And now, my boy, here are a
hundred gold pieces. Use them in the king's service. When I hear that
you are abroad I will write to Master Fleming to arrange with his
correspondents, whether in France or Holland, as you may chance to be,
to pay the money regularly into your hands. You will, I suppose, take
Jacob with you?"

"Assuredly I will," Harry said. "He is attached and faithful, and
although he cares not very greatly for the King's cause, I know he will
follow my fortunes. He is sick to death of the post which I obtained for
him after the war, with a scrivener at Oxford. I will also take William
Long with me, if he will go. He is a merry fellow, and has a wise head.
He and Jacob did marvelously at Edinburgh, when they cozened the
preachers, and got me out of the clutches of Argyll. With two such
trusty followers I could go through Europe. I will ride over to Oxford
at once."

As Harry anticipated, Jacob was delighted at the prospect of abandoning
his scrivener's desk.

"I don't believe," he said, when he had learned from Harry that they
were going to the king at Hampton, "that aught will come of these
plottings. As I told you when we were apprentices together, I love
plots, but there are men with whom it is fatal to plot. Such a one,
assuredly, is his gracious majesty. For a plot to be successful, all to
be concerned in it must know their own minds, and be true as steel to
each other. The King never knows his own mind for half an hour together,
and, unfortunately, he seems unable to be true to any one. So let it be
understood, Master Harry, that I go into this business partly from love
of you, who have been truly a most kind friend to me, partly because I
love adventure, and hate this scrivener's desk, partly because there is
a chance that I may benefit by the change."

Harry bade him procure apparel as a sober retainer in a Puritan family,
and join him that night at Furness Hall, as he purposed to set out at
daybreak. William Long also agreed at once to follow Harry's fortunes.
The old farmer, his father, offered no objection.

"It is right that my son should ride with the heir of Furness Hall," he
said. "We have been Furness tenants for centuries, and have ever fought
by our lords in battle. Besides, Master Harry, I doubt me whether
William will ever settle down here in peace. His elder brother will have
the farm after me, so it matters not greatly, but your wars and
journeyings have turned his head, and he thinks of arms and steel caps
more than of fat beeves or well-tilled fields."

The next morning, soon after daybreak, Harry and his followers left
Furness Hall, and arrived the same night at Hampton. Here they put up at
a hostelry, and Harry sent a messenger to Lord Ashburnham, who had
summoned him, and was in attendance upon the king, to say that he had
arrived.

An hour later Lord Ashburnham joined him. "I am glad you have come,
Master Furness," he said. "The king needs faithful servants; and it's
well that you have come to-day, as I have been ordered by those in power
to remove from the king's person. His majesty has lost all hope of
coming to an agreement with either party here. At one time it seemed
that Cromwell and Ireton were like to have joined him, but a letter of
the king's, in which he spoke of them somewhat discourteously, fell
into their hands, and they have now given themselves wholly over to the
party most furious against the king. Therefore he has resolved to fly.
Do you move from hence and take up your quarters at Kingston, where no
curious questions are likely to be asked you. I shall take lodgings at
Ditton, and shall there await orders from the king. It may be that he
will change his mind, but of this Major Legg, who attends him in his
bedchamber, will notify us. Our design is to ride to the coast near
Southampton and there take ship, and embark for France. It is not likely
that we shall be attacked by the way, but as the king may be recognized
in any town through which we may pass, it is as well to have half a
dozen good swords on which we can rely."

"I have with me," Harry said, "my friend Jacob, who was lieutenant in my
troop, and who can wield a sword well, and one of my old troopers, a
stout and active lad. You can rely upon them as on me."

Lord Ashburnham stayed but a few minutes with Harry, and then mounted
and rode to Ditton, while Harry the same afternoon journeyed on into
Kingston, and there took up his lodgings. On the 11th of November, three
days after their arrival, Harry received a message from Lord Ashburnham,
asking him to ride over to Ditton. At his lodgings there he found Sir
John Berkeley. Major Legg shortly after arrived, and told them that the
king had determined, when he went into his private room for evening
prayer, to slip away, and make for the river side, where they were to be
in readiness for him with horses. Harry had brought his followers with
him, and had left them at an inn while he visited Lord Ashburnham.
William Long at once rode back to Kingston, and there purchased two good
horses, with saddles, for the king and Major Legg. At seven in the
evening the party mounted, William Long and Jacob each leading a spare
horse. Lord Ashburnham and Sir John Berkeley joined them outside the
village, and they rode together until, crossing the bridge at Hampton,
they stopped on the river bank, at the point arranged, near the palace.
Half an hour passed, and then footsteps were heard, and two figures
approached. Not a word was spoken until they were near enough to discern
their faces.

"Thank God you are here, my Lord Ashburnham," the king said. "Fortune is
always so against me that I feared something might occur to detain you.
Ha! Master Furness, I am glad to see so faithful a friend."

The king and Major Legg now mounted, and the little party rode off.
Their road led through Windsor Forest, then of far greater extent than
at present. Through this the king acted as guide. The night was wild and
stormy, but the king was well acquainted with the forest, and at
daybreak the party, weary and drenched, arrived at Sutton, in Hampshire.
Here they found six horses, which Lord Ashburnham had on the previous
day sent forward, and mounting these, they again rode on. As the sun
rose their spirits revived, and the king entered into conversation with
Ashburnham, Berkeley, and Harry as to his plans. The latter was
surprised and disappointed to find that so hurriedly had the king
finally made up his mind to fly that no ship had been prepared to take
him from the coast, and that it was determined that for the time the
king should go to the Isle of Wight. The governor of the Isle of Wight
was Colonel Hammond, who was connected with both parties. His uncle was
chaplain to the king, and he was himself married to a daughter of
Hampden. It was arranged that the king and Major Legg should proceed to
a house of Lord Southampton at Titchfield, and that Berkeley and Lord
Ashburnham should go to the Isle of Wight to Colonel Hammond, to find
if he would receive the king. Harry, with his followers, was to proceed
to Southampton, and there to procure a ship, which was to be in
readiness to embark the king when a message was received from him.
Agents of the king had already received orders to have a ship in
readiness, and should this be done, it was at once to be brought round
to Titchfield.

"This seems to me," Jacob said, as, after separating from the king, they
rode to Southampton, "to be but poor plotting. Here has the king been
for three months at Hampton Court, and could, had he so chosen, have
fixed his flight for any day at his will. A vessel might have been
standing on and off the coast, ready to receive him, and he could have
ridden down, and embarked immediately he reached the coast. As it is,
there is no ship and no arrangement, and for aught he knows he may be a
closer prisoner in the Isle of Wight than he was at Hampton, while both
parties with whom he has been negotiating will be more furious than ever
at finding that he has fooled them. If I could not plot better than this
I would stick to a scrivener's desk all my life."

It was late in the afternoon when they rode into Southampton. They found
the city in a state of excitement. A messenger had, an hour before,
ridden in from London with the news of the king's escape, and with
orders from Parliament that no vessel should be allowed to leave the
port. Harry then rode to Portsmouth, but there also he was unable to do
anything. He heard that in the afternoon the king had crossed over onto
the Isle of Wight, and that he had been received by the governor with
marks of respect. They, therefore, again returned to Southampton, and
there took a boat for Cowes. Leaving his followers there, Harry rode to
Newport, and saw the king. The latter said that for the present he had
altogether changed his mind about escaping to France, and that Sir John
Berkeley would start at once to negotiate with the heads of the army. He
begged Harry to go to London, and to send him from time to time sure
news of the state of feeling of the populace.

Taking his followers with him, Harry rode to London, disguised as a
country trader. He held communication with many leading citizens, as
well as with apprentices and others with whom he could get into
conversation in the streets and public resorts. He found that the vast
majority of the people of London were longing for the overthrow of the
rule of the Independents, and for the restoration of the king. The
preachers were as busy as ever haranguing people in the streets, and
especially at Paul's Cross. In the cathedral of St. Paul's the
Independent soldiers had stabled their horses, to the great anger of
many moderate people, who were shocked at the manner in which those who
had first begun to fight for liberty of conscience now tyrannized over
the consciences and insulted the feelings of all others. Harry and his
followers mixed among the groups, and aided in inflaming the temper of
the people by passing jeering remarks, and loudly questioning the
statements of the preachers. These, unaccustomed to interruption, would
rapidly lose temper, and they and their partisans would make a rush
through the crowd to seize their interrogators. Then the apprentices
would interfere, blows would be exchanged, and not unfrequently the
fanatics were driven in to take refuge with the troops in St. Paul's.
Harry found a small printer of Royalist opinions, and with the
assistance of Jacob, strung together many doggerel verses, making a
scoff of the sour-faced rulers of England, and calling upon the people
not to submit to be tyrannized over by their own paid servants, the
army. These verses were then set in type by the printer, and in the
evening, taking different ways, they distributed them in the streets to
passers-by.

Day by day the feeling in the city rose higher, as the quarrels at
Westminster between the Independents, backed by the army and the
Presbyterian majority, waxed higher and higher. All this time the king
was negotiating with commissioners from the army, and with others sent
by the Scots, one day inclining to one party, the next to the other,
making promises to both, but intending to observe none, as soon as he
could gain his ends.

On Sunday, the 9th of April, Harry and his friends strolled up to Moor
Fields to look at the apprentices playing bowls there. Presently from
the barracks of the militia hard by a party of soldiers came out, and
ordered them to desist, some of the soldiers seizing upon the bowls.

"Now, lads," Harry shouted, "you will not stand that, will you? The
London apprentices were not wont to submit to be ridden rough-shod over
by troops. Has all spirit been taken out of you by the long-winded
sermons of these knaves in steeple hats?"

Some of the soldiers made a rush at Harry. His two friends closed in by
him. The two first of the soldiers who arrived were knocked down.
Others, however, seized the young men, but the apprentices crowded up,
pelted the soldiers with stones, and, by sheer weight, overthrew those
who had taken Harry and carried him off. The soldiers soon came pouring
out of their barracks, but fleet-footed lads had, at the commencement of
the quarrel, run down into the streets, raising the shout of "clubs,"
and swarms of apprentices came running up. Led by Harry and his
followers, who carried heavy sticks, they charged the militia with such
fury that these, in spite of their superior arms, were driven back
fighting into their barracks. When the gates were shut Harry mounted on
a stone and harangued the apprentices--he recalled to them the ancient
rights of the city, rights which the most absolute monarchs who had sat
upon the throne had not ventured to infringe, that no troops should pass
through the streets or be quartered there to restrict the liberties of
the citizens. "No king would have ventured so to insult the people of
London; why should the crop-haired knaves at Westminster dare to do so?
If you had the spirit of your fathers you would not bear it for a
moment."

"We will not, we will not," shouted the crowd. "Down with the soldiers!"

At this moment a lad approached at full run to say that the cavalry were
coming from St. Paul's. In their enthusiasm the apprentices prepared to
resist, but Harry shouted to them:

"Not here in the fields. Scatter now and assemble in the streets. With
the chains up, we can beat them there."

The apprentices gave a cheer, and, scattering, made their way from the
fields just as the cavalry issued into the open space. Hurrying in all
directions, the apprentices carried the news, and soon the streets
swarmed with their fellows. They were quickly joined by the watermen--in
those days a numerous and powerful body. These were armed with oars and
boat-stretchers. The chains which were fastened at night across the ends
of the streets were quickly placed in position, and all was prepared to
resist the attack of the troops.




 

A RIOT IN THE CITY.


So quickly were the preparations made that by the time the cavalry came
riding back from Moor Fields they found the way barred to them. The
commander of the cavalry ordered his men to charge. Harry, who had now
taken the command of the crowd, ordered a few of the apprentices to
stand before the first line of chains, so that these would not be
visible until the horses were close upon them. Behind the chains he
placed a strong body of watermen with their oars, while behind these,
and at the windows of the houses, were the apprentices, each armed with
a quantity of stones and broken bricks. The cavalry charged down upon
the defense. When they reached within a few yards of the apprentices in
front, these slipped under the chain. The leading troopers halted, but
were pressed by those behind them gainst the chain. Then a ram of stones
and brickbats opened upon them, and the watermen struck down men and
horses with their heavy oars. In vain the troopers tried with their
swords to reach their opponents. In vain they fired their pistols into
the mass. They were knocked down by the stones and brickbats in numbers,
and at last, their commander having been struck senseless, the rest drew
off, a tremendous cheer greeting their retreat, from the crowd.

"Now," Harry shouted, taking his position on a doorstep, whence he could
be seen, "attend to me. The battle has only begun yet, and they will
bring up their infantry now. Next time we will let them enter the
street, and defend the chains at the other end--a party must hold
these--do some of you fill each lane which comes down on either side,
and do ten of you enter each house and take post at the upper windows,
with a good store of ammunition. Do not show yourselves until the head
of their column reaches the chain. Then fling open the windows and pour
volleys of stones and bricks upon them. Then let those in the side
streets, each headed by parties of watermen, fall upon their flanks.
Never fear their musketry. They can only give fire once before you are
upon them. The oars will beat down the pikes, and your clubs will do the
rest. Now let the apprentices of each street form themselves into
parties, each under their captain. Let all be regular and orderly, and
we will show them what the Londoners can do."

With a cheer the crowd separated, and soon took post as Harry had
directed. He stationed himself at the barricade at the head of the
street. A quarter of an hour later the militia were seen approaching in
close column followed by the cavalry. On arriving at the end of the
street the assailants removed the chain, and again advanced. The street
was silent until they neared its end. The watermen had, under Harry's
direction, torn up the paving stones, and formed a barricade breast
high, behind which, remaining crouched, they awaited the assault.

The fight began by a volley of stones from the apprentices behind the
barricade. The leading rank of the column discharged their muskets, and
rushed at the barricade; the watermen sprang to oppose them. At the
sound of the first shot every window in the street opened, and a rain of
bricks and heavy stones poured down on all sides upon the column, while
at the same time dense masses flung themselves upon its flanks, from
every lane leading into it. Confused and broken by the sudden onslaught
in the narrow street, the column halted, and endeavored to open a fire
upon the upper windows. This, however, effected but little harm, while
every brick from above told upon their crowded mass. The column was
instantly in confusion, and Harry and his followers, leaping over the
barricade, and followed by the watermen and apprentices behind, fell
upon it with fury. In vain did the Roundheads strive to repulse the
attack. Their numbers melted away as they fell, killed or senseless,
from the rain of missiles from above. Already the column was rent by
their assailants on the flanks, and in less than five minutes from the
commencement of the assault those who remained on their legs were driven
headlong out into Moor Fields.

Loud rose the triumphant cry of the defenders, "God and King Charles."
Some hours elapsed before any attempt was made to renew the assault.
Then toward evening fresh troops were brought up from Westminster, and
the attack was renewed on two sides. Still the apprentices held their
own. Attack after attack was repulsed. All night the fight continued,
and when morning dawned the Royalists were still triumphant.

"How will it go, think you, Jacob?" Harry asked.

"They will beat us in the long run," Jacob said. "They have not been
properly led yet. When they are, guns and swords must prevail against
clubs and stones."

At eleven o'clock in the morning a heavy body of cavalry were seen
approaching from Westminster. The Roundheads had brought up Cromwell's
Ironsides, the victors in many a hard-fought field, against the
apprentice boys of London. The Roundhead infantry advanced with their
horse. As they approached the first barricade the cavalry halted, and
the infantry advanced alone to within thirty yards of it. Then, just as
its defenders thought they were going to charge, they halted, divided
into bodies, and entered the houses on either side, and appeared at the
windows. Then, as the Ironsides came down at a gallop, they opened a
heavy fire on the defenders of the barricade. Harry saw at once that the
tactics now adopted were irresistible, and that further attempts at
defense would only lead to useless slaughter. He therefore shouted:

"Enough for to-day, lads. Every man back to his own house. We will begin
again when we choose. We have given them a good lesson."

In an instant the crowd dispersed, and by the time the Ironsides had
dismounted, broken the chains, and pulled down the barricade
sufficiently to enable them to pass, Ludgate Hill was deserted, the
apprentices were back in their masters' shops, and the watermen standing
by their boats ready for a fare.

Seeing that their persons were known to so many of the citizens, and
would be instantly pointed out to the troops by those siding with the
army, who had, during the tumult, remained quietly in their houses,
watching from the windows what was going on, Harry and his friends
hurried straight to Aldersgate, where they passed out into the country
beyond. Dressed in laborers' smocks, which they had, in preparation for
any sudden flight, left at the house of a Royalist innkeeper, a mile or
two in the fields, they walked to Kingston, crossed the river there, and
made for Southampton.

The king was now closely confined in Carisbrook Castle. For the first
three months of his residence in the Isle of Wight he could have escaped
with ease, had he chosen, and it is probable that Cromwell and the other
leaders of the army would have been glad that he should go, and thus
relieve the country from the inconvenience of his presence. They had
become convinced that so long as he lived quiet could not be hoped for.
While still pretending to negotiate with them, he had signed a treaty
with the Scots, promising to establish Presbyterianism in England, and
their army was already marching south. To the Irish Papists he had
promised free exercise of their religion, and these were taking up arms
and massacring all opposed to them, as was the custom in that barbarous
country. In Wales a formidable insurrection had broken out. Essex and
Kent were up in arms, and, indeed, all through the country the Royalists
were stirring. The leaders had therefore determined upon bringing the
king to trial.

At Southampton Harry found Sir John Berkeley concealed in a house where
he had previously instructed Harry he might be looked for. He told him
that the king was now a close prisoner, and would assuredly escape if
means could be provided. Leaving Sir John, Harry joined his followers,
and after telling them the circumstances, they walked down to the port.
Here they entered into conversation with an old sailor. Seeing that he
was an honest fellow, and in no way disposed toward the fanatics, Harry
told him that he and those with him were Cavaliers, who sought to cross
over into France.

"There is a boat, there," the sailor said, pointing to a lugger which
was lying at anchor among some fishing boats, "that will carry you. The
captain, Dick Wilson, is a friend of mine, and often makes a run across
to France on dark nights, and brings back smuggled goods. I know where
he can be found, and will lead you to him, if it so pleases you." Upon
their gladly accepting the offer he led them to a small inn by the water
side, and introduced them to the captain of the Moonlight, for so the
lugger was called. Upon receiving a hint from the sailor that his
companions wished to speak to him in private, Wilson led the way
upstairs to the chamber he occupied. Here Harry at once unfolded to him
the nature of the service he required. He was to lay with his boat off
the bank of the island, making to sea before daylight, and returning
after dusk, and was to take his station off a gap in the cliffs, known
as Black Gang Chine, where a footpath from above descended to the beach.
Upon a light being shown three times at the water's edge he was to send
a boat immediately ashore, and embarking those whom he might find there,
sail for France. If at the end of the week none should come, he would
know that his services would not be required, and might sail away
whither he listed. He was to receive fifty guineas at once for the
service, and if he transported those who might come down to the shore,
to France, he would, on arriving there, be paid two hundred and fifty
more.

"It is the king, of course, who seeks to escape," the sailor said.
"Well, young gentlemen, for such I doubt not that you are, I am ready to
try it. We sailors are near all for the king, and the fleet last week
declared for him, and sailed for Holland. So, once on board, there will
be little danger. Pay me the fifty guineas at once, and you may rely
upon the Moonlight being at the point named."

Harry handed over the money, and arranged that on the third night
following the lugger should beat the post appointed, and that it should
at once run them across and land them at Cowes. It was now the middle of
May, and Harry and his friends, who were still in the disguise of
countrymen, walked across to Newport. Their first step was to examine
the castle. It lay a short distance from the town, was surrounded by a
high wall with towers, and could offer a strong resistance to an
attacking force. At the back of the castle was a small postern gate, at
which they decided that his escape must, if possible, be made. Harry had
been well supplied with money by Sir John Berkeley before leaving
Southampton, Sir John himself, on account of his figure being so well
known at Newport, during his stay there with the king, deeming it
imprudent to take any personal part in the enterprise. After an
examination of the exterior of the castle Harry bought a large basket of
eggs, and some chickens, and with these proceeded to the castle. There
was a guard at the gate, but persons could freely enter. As Harry's
wares were exceedingly cheap in price, he speedily effected a sale of
them to the soldiers and servants of the officers.

"I should like," he said to the man to whom he disposed of the last of
the contents of his basket, "to catch a sight of the king. I ha' never
seen him."

"That's easy enough," the man said. "Just mount these stairs with me to
the wall. He is walking in the garden at the back of the castle."

Harry followed the man, and presently reached a spot where he could look
down into the garden. The king was pacing up and down the walk, his head
bent, his hands behind his back, apparently in deep thought. An
attendant, a short distance behind him, followed his steps.

"Be that the king?" Harry asked. "He don't look like a king."

"That's him," the man said, "and he's not much of a king at present."

"Where does he live now?" Harry asked.

"That is his room," the man said, pointing to a window some ten feet
from the ground. After a little further conversation Harry appeared to
be satisfied, and returning to the courtyard, made his way from the
castle. During that day and the next they remained quiet, except that
Jacob walked over to Cowes, where he purchased two very fine and sharp
saws, and a short length of strong rope, with a hook. The following
night they hired a cart with a fast horse, and this they placed at a
spot a quarter of a mile from the castle.

Leaving the man in charge of it there, Harry and his companions made for
the back of the castle. They could tell by the calls upon the walls that
the sentries were watchful, but the night was so dark that they had no
fear whatever of being seen. Very quietly they crossed the moat, which
was shallow, and with but little water in it. Then with an auger they
cut four holes in a square two feet each way in the door, and, with a
saw, speedily cut the piece inclosed by them out, and creeping through,
entered the garden. The greater part of the lights were already
extinguished, but that in the king's chamber was still burning. They
made their way quietly until they stood beneath this window, and waited
until the light here was also put out. Then Harry climbed on to the
shoulders of his companions, which brought his face on a level with the
window. He tapped at it. The king, who had been warned that his friends
would attempt to open a means of escape, at once came to the window, and
threw open the casement.

"Who is there?" he asked, in low tones.

"It is I, Harry Furness, your majesty. I have two trusty friends with
me. We have cut a hole through the postern gate, a cart is waiting
without, and a ship lies ready to receive you on the coast."

"I am ready," the king said. "Thanks, my faithful servant. But have you
brought something to cut the bars?"

"The bars!" Henry exclaimed, aghast. "I did not know that there were
bars!"

"There are, indeed, Master Furness," the king said, "and if you have no
file the enterprise is ruined."

Harry put his hands on the stonework and pulled himself up, and felt the
bars within the window.

"They are too strong for our united strength," he said, in a tone of
deep disappointment. "But methinks it is possible to get between them."
Putting his head between the bars he struggled though, but with great
difficulty. "See, your majesty, I have got through."

"Ay, Master Furness, but you are slighter in figure than I, although you
are changed indeed since first the colonel, your father, presented you
to me at Oxford. However, I will try." The king tried, but in vain. He
was stouter than Harry, although less broadly built, and had none of the
lissomness which enabled the latter to wriggle through the bars. "It is
useless," he said at last. "Providence is against me. It is the will of
God that I should remain here. It may be the decree of Heaven that even
yet I may sit again on the throne of my ancestors. Now go, Master
Furness. It is too late to renew the attempt to-night. Should Charles
Stuart ever reign again over England, he will not forget your faithful
service."

Harry kissed the king's hand, and with a prayer for his welfare he again
made his way through the bars and dropped from the window, by the side
of his companions, the tears streaming down his cheeks with the
disappointment and sorrow he felt at the failure of his enterprise. "It
is all over," he said. "The king cannot force his way through the bars."

Without another word they made their way down to the postern, passed
through it, and replaced the piece of wood in its position, in the faint
hope that it might escape notice. Then they rejoined the driver with the
cart, paid him handsomely, and told him that his services would not be
required that night at least. They then returned to their lodgings in
the town. The next morning early Jacob started for Cowes to buy some
sharp files and aquafortis, but an hour later the news passed through
Newport that an attempt had been made in the night to free the king,
that a hole had been cut in the postern, and the marks of footsteps
discovered under the king's window. Perceiving that it would be useless
to renew the attempt now that the suspicions of the garrison were
aroused, Harry and William Long, fearing that a search would be
instituted, at once started for Cowes. They met Jacob close to that
town, crossed in a boat to the mainland, and walked to Southampton. They
hesitated whether they should join Lord Goring, who had risen in Kent,
or Lord Capel and Sir Charles Lucas, who had collected a large force at
Colchester. They determined upon the latter course, as the movement
appeared to promise a better chance of success. Taking passage in a
coaster, they sailed to the mouth of the Thames, and being landed near
Tilbury, made their way to Colchester. Harry was, on his arrival,
welcomed by the Royalist leaders, who were well acquainted with him.
They proposed to march upon London, which would, they felt sure, declare
for the king upon their approach. They had scarcely set their force in
motion when they heard that Fairfax, at the head of an army, was
marching against them. A debate was held among the leaders as to the
best course to pursue. Some were for marching north, but the eastern
counties had, from the commencement of the troubles, been wholly on the
side of the Parliament. Others were for dispersing the bands, and
awaiting a better opportunity for a rising. Sir Charles Lucas, however,
urged that they should defend Colchester to the last.

"Here," he said, "we are doing good service to the Royal cause, and by
detaining Fairfax here, we shall give time to our friends in Wales,
Kent, and other parts to rise and organize. If it is seen that whenever
we meet the Roundheads we disperse at once, hope and confidence will be
lost."

The next day the town was invested by Fairfax, and shortly after the
siege began in earnest. The Royalists fought with great bravery, and for
two months every attempt of the Roundheads to storm the place was
repulsed. At length, however, supplies ran short, several breaches had
been made in the walls by the Roundhead artillery, and a council of war
was held, at which it was decided that further resistance was useless,
and would only inflict a great slaughter upon their followers, who, in
the event of surrender, would for the most part be permitted to return
to their homes. Harry Furness was present at the council and agreed to
the decision. He said, however, that he would endeavor, with his two
personal followers, to effect his escape, as, if he were taken a
prisoner to London, he should be sure to be recognized there as the
leader of the rising in May, in which case he doubted not that little
mercy would be shown to him. The Royalist leaders agreed with him, but
pointed out that his chances of escape were small, as the town was
closely beleaguered. Harry, however, declared that he preferred the risk
of being shot while endeavoring to escape, to the certainty of being
executed if carried to London.

That night they procured some bladders, for although Jacob and Harry
were able to swim, William Long could not do so, and in any case it was
safer to float than to swim. The bladders were blown out and their necks
securely fastened. The three adventurers were then lowered from the wall
by ropes, and having fastened the bladders around them, noiselessly
entered the water. A numerous flotilla of ships and boats of the
Commons lay below the town; the tide was running out, however, and the
night dark, and keeping hold of each other, so as not to be separated by
the tide, they drifted through these unobserved. Once safely out of
hearing, Jacob and Harry struck out and towed their companion to shore.
While at Colchester they had been attired as Royalist officers, but they
had left these garments behind them, and carried, strapped to their
shoulders, above water, the countrymen's clothes in which they had
entered the town. They walked as far as Brentwood, where they stopped
for a few days, and learned the news of what was passing throughout the
country.

Colchester surrendered on the 27th of August, the morning after they
left it. Lord Capel was sent a prisoner to London to be tried for his
life; but Fairfax caused Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle to be
tried by court-martial, and shot. On the 10th of July the town and
castle of Pembroke had surrendered to Cromwell, who immediately
afterward marched north to meet the Scotch army, which six days before
had entered England. The Duke of Hamilton, who commanded it, was at once
joined by five thousand English Royalists under Sir Marmaduke Langdale.
General Lambert, who commanded the Parliamentary troops in the north,
fell back to avoid a battle until Cromwell could join him.

The Scotch army could not be called a national force. The Scotch
Parliament, influenced by the Duke of Hamilton and others, had entered
into an agreement with King Charles, and undertook to reinstate him on
the throne. The more violent section, headed by Argyll, were bitterly
hostile to the step. The Duke of Hamilton's army, therefore, consisted
entirely of raw and undisciplined troops. Cromwell marched with great
speed through Wales to Gloucester, and then on through Leicester and
Nottingham, and joined Lambert at Barnet Castle on the 12th of August.
Then he marched against the Scotch army, which, straggling widely and
thinking Cromwell still at a distance, was advancing toward Manchester.
On the 16th the duke with his advanced guard was at Preston, with
Langdale on his left. Cromwell attacked Langdale with his whole force
next morning, and the Royalists after fighting stoutly were entirely
defeated. Then he fell upon the Duke of Hamilton and the force under him
at Preston, and after four hours' sharp fighting in the inclosures round
the place, defeated and drove them out of the town. That night the Scots
determined to retreat, and at once began to scatter. General Baillie,
after some hard fighting around Warrington, surrendered with his
division. The duke with three thousand men went to Nantwich. The country
was hostile, his own troops, wearied and dispirited, mutinied, and
declared they would fight no longer; the Duke of Hamilton thereupon
surrendered, the Scotch invasion of England came to an end.




 

THE EXECUTION OF KING CHARLES.


The news of the failure of the Welsh insurrection and the Scotch
invasion, while the risings in Kent and Essex were crushed out, showed
Harry Furness that, for the time at least, there was no further fighting
to be done. Cromwell, after the defeat of the Scotch, marched with his
army to Edinburgh, where he was received with enthusiasm by Argyll and
the fanatic section, who were now again restored to power, and
recommenced a cruel persecution of all suspected of Royalist opinions.
Now that the Scotch had been beaten, and the Royalist rising everywhere
crushed out, the Parliament were seized with fear as to the course which
Cromwell and his victorious army might pursue. If they had been so
arrogant and haughty before, what might not be expected now.
Negotiations were at once opened with the king. He was removed from
Carisbrook to a good house at Newport. Commissioners came down there,
and forty days were spent in prolonged argument, and the commissioners
returned to London on the 28th of November with a treaty signed. It was
too late. The army stationed at St. Albans sent in a remonstrance to
Parliament, calling upon them to bring the king to trial, and stating
that if Parliament neglected its duty the army would take the matter
into its own hands. This remonstrance caused great excitement in the
Commons. No steps were taken upon it however, and the Commons proceeded
to discuss the treaty, and voted that the king's concessions were
sufficient. On the 29th a body of soldiers went across to the Isle of
Wight, surrounded the king's house, seized him and carried him to Hurst
Castle. The next day Parliament voted that they would not debate the
remonstrance of the army, and in reply the army at Windsor marched on
the 2d of December into London. On the 5th the Commons debated all day
upon the treaty.

Prynne, formerly one of the stanchest opposers of King Charles, spoke
with others strongly in his favor, and it was carried by a hundred and
twenty-nine to thirty-eight. The same day some of the leaders of the
army met, and determined to expel from the house all those opposed to
their interests. On the 7th the Trained Bands of the city were withdrawn
from around the House, and Colonel Pride with his regiment of foot
surrounded it. As the members arrived forty-one of them were turned
back. The same process was repeated on the two following days, until
over a hundred members had been arrested. Thus the army performed a
revolution such as no English sovereign has dared to carry out. After
this it is idle to talk of the Parliament as in any way representing
the English people. The representatives who supported the king had long
since left it. The whole of the moderate portion of those who had
opposed him, that is to say, those who had fought to support the
liberties of Englishmen against encroachments by the king, and who
formed the majority after the Royalists had retired, were now expelled;
there remained only a small body of fanatics devoted to the interests of
the army, and determined to crush out all liberties of England under its
armed heel. This was the body before whom the king was ere long to
undergo the mockery of a trial.

King Charles was taken to Hurst Castle on the 17th of December, and
three days later carried to Windsor. On the 2d of January, 1649, the
Commons voted that in making war against the Parliament the king had
been guilty of treason, and should be tried by a court of a hundred and
fifty commissioners. The Peers rejected the bill, and the Commons then
voted that neither the assent of the Peers nor the king was necessary
for a law passed by themselves.

All the encroachments of King Charles together were as nothing to this
usurpation of despotic power.

In consequence of the conduct of the Peers, the number of commissioners
was reduced to a hundred and thirty-five; but of these only sixty-nine
assembled at the trial. Thus the court which was to try the king
consisted only of those who were already pledged to destroy him. Before
such a court as this there could be but one end to the trial. When,
after deciding upon their sentence, the king was brought in to hear it,
the chief commissioner told him that the charges were brought against
him in the name of the people of England, when Lady Fairfax from the
gallery cried out, "It's a lie! Not one-half of them." Had she said not
one hundredth of them, she would have been within the mark.

On the 27th sentence was pronounced. On the 29th the court signed the
sentence, which was to be carried out on the following day.

From the time when Harry Furness left Brentwood at the end of August
until the king was brought to London, he had lived quietly at
Southampton. He feared to return home, and chose this port as his
residence, in order that he might, if necessary, cross into France at
short notice. When the news came that the king had been brought up from
Windsor, Harry and his friends at once rode to London, Every one was so
absorbed in the great trial about to take place that Harry had little
fear of attracting attention or of being molested should any one
recognize in the young gentleman in sober attire the rustic who had led
the rising in the spring. To London, too, came many other Cavaliers from
all parts of the country, eager to see if something might not be
attempted to rescue the king. Throughout London the consternation was
great at the usurpation by the remnant of the Commons of all the rights
of the Three Estates, and still more, at the trial of the king. The
army, however, lay in and about London, and, with Cromwell at its head,
it would, the people felt, easily crush out any attempt at a rising in
the city. Within a few hours of his arrival in London, Harry saw that
there was no hope from any effort in this direction, and that the only
possible chance of saving the king was by his arranging for his escape.
His majesty, on his arrival from Windsor, had been lodged in St. James'
Palace, and as this was completely surrounded by the Roundhead troops,
there was no chance of effecting an invasion thence. The only possible
plan appeared to be a sudden attack upon his guards on his way to
execution.

Harry gathered round him a party of thirty Cavaliers, all men ready like
himself to sacrifice their lives for the king. Their plan was to gather
near Whitehall, where the execution was to take place, to burst through
the soldiers lining the way, to cut down the guards, and carry the king
to a boat in readiness behind Whitehall, This was to convey him across
to Lambeth, where fleet horses were to be stationed, which would take
him down to the Essex coast.

The plan was a desperate one, but it might possibly have succeeded,
could the Cavaliers have gained the position which they wished. The
whole of the army was, however, placed in the streets and passages
leading to Whitehall, and between that place and the city the cavalry
were drawn up, preventing any from coming in or going out. When they
found that this was the case, the Cavaliers in despair mounted their
horses, and rode into the country, with their hearts filled with grief
and rage.

On the 30th, an hour after the king's execution, proclamation was made
that whoever should proclaim a new king would be deemed a traitor, and a
week later, the Commons, now reduced to a hundred members, formally
abolished the House of Peers. A little later Lord Capel, Lord Holland,
and the Duke of Hamilton were executed.

Had the king effected his escape, Harry Furness had determined to return
to Abingdon and live quietly at home, believing that now the army had
grasped all power, and crushed all opposition, it was probable that they
would abstain from exciting further popular animosity by the persecution
of those who had fought against them. The fury, however, excited in his
mind by the murder of the king after the mockery of a trial, determined
him to fight to the last, wherever a rising might be offered, however
hopeless a success that rising might appear. He would not, however,
suffer Jacob and William Long any longer to follow his fortunes,
although they earnestly pleaded to do so. "I have no hope of success,"
he said. "I am ready to die, but I will not bring you to that strait. I
have written to my father begging him, Jacob, to receive you as his
friend and companion, and to do what he can, William, to assist you in
whatever mode of life your wishes may hereafter lead you to adopt. But
come with me you shall not."

Not without tears did Harry's faithful companions yield themselves to
his will, and set out for Abingdon, while he, with eight or ten comrades
as determined as himself, kept on west until they arrived at Bristol,
where they took ship and crossed to Ireland. They landed at Waterford,
and journeyed north until they reached the army, with which the Marquis
of Ormonde was besieging Dublin. Nothing that Harry had seen of war in
England prepared him in any way for the horrors which he beheld in
Ireland. The great mass of the people there were at that time but a few
degrees advanced above savages, and they carried on their war with a
brutal cruelty and bloodshed which could now only be rivaled in the
center of Africa. Between the Protestants and the English and Scotch
settlers on the one hand, and the wild peasantry on the other, a war of
something like extermination went on. Wholesale massacres took place, at
which men, women, and children were indiscriminately butchered, the
ferocity shown being as great upon one side as the other. In fact,
beyond the possession of a few large towns, Ireland had no claim
whatever to be considered a civilized country. As Harry and his comrades
rode from Waterford they beheld everywhere ruined fields and burned
houses; and on joining the army of the Marquis of Ormonde, Harry felt
even more strongly than before the hopelessness of the struggle on which
he was engaged. These bands of wild, half-clad kernes, armed with pike
and billhook, might be brave indeed, but could do nothing against the
disciplined soldiers of the Parliament. There were with Ormonde, indeed,
better troops than these. Some of the companies were formed of English
and Welsh Royalists. Others had been raised by the Catholic gentry of
the west, and into these some sort of order and discipline had been
introduced. The army, moreover, was deficient in artillery, and not more
than one-third of the footmen carried firearms. Harry was, a day or two
after reaching the camp of Lord Ormonde, sent off to the West to drill
some of the newly-raised levies there. It was now six years since he had
begun to take an active part in the war, and he was between twenty-one
and twenty-two. His life of active exertion had strengthened his
muscles, broadened his frame, and given a strength and vigor to his tall
and powerful figure.

Foreseeing that the siege of Dublin was not likely to be successful,
Harry accepted his commission to the West with pleasure. He felt already
that with all his devotion to the Royalist cause he could not wish that
the siege of Dublin should be successful; for he saw that the vast
proportion of the besieging army were animated by no sense of loyalty,
by no interest in the constitutional question at stake, but simply with
a blind hatred of the Protestant population of Dublin, and that the
capture of the city would probably be followed by the indiscriminate
slaughter of its inhabitants.

He set out on his journey, furnished with letters from Ormonde to
several influential gentlemen in Galway. The roads at first were fairly
good, but accustomed to the comfortable inns in England, Harry found the
resting-places along the road execrable. He was amused of an evening by
the eagerness with which the people came round and asked for news from
Dublin. In all parts of England the little sheets which then did service
as newspapers carried news of the events which were taking place. It is
true that none of the country population could read or write; but the
alehouses served as centers of news. The village clerk, or, perhaps, the
squire's bailiff, could read, as could probably the landlord, and thus
the news spread quickly round the country. In Ireland news traveled only
from mouth to mouth, often becoming strangely distorted on the way.

Harry was greatly struck by the bareness of the fields and the poverty
of the country; and as he journeyed further west the country became
still wilder and more lonely. It was seldom now that he met any one who
could speak English, and as the road was often little more than a track,
he had great difficulty in keeping his way, and regretted that he had
not hired a servant knowing the country before leaving the army. He
generally, however, was able to obtain a guide from village to village.
The loneliness of the way, the wretchedness of the people, the absence
of the brightness and comfort so characteristic of English life, made
the journey an oppressive one, and Harry was glad when, five days after
leaving Dublin, he approached the end of his ride. Upon this day he had
taken no guide, being told that the road was clear and unmistakable as
far as Galway.

He had not traveled many hours when a heavy mist set in, accompanied by
a keen and driving rain, in his face. With his head bent down, Harry
rode along, paying less attention than usual to his way. The mist grew
thicker and thicker. The horse no longer proceeded at a brisk pace, and
presently came to a stop. Harry dismounted, and discovered that he had
left the road, Turning his horse's head, and taking the reins over his
arm, he tried to retrace his steps.

For an hour he walked along, the conviction growing every moment that he
was hopelessly lost. The ground was now soft and miry and was covered
with tussocks of coarse grass, between which the soil was black and
oozy. The horse floundered on for some distance, but with such
increasing difficulty that, upon reaching a space of comparatively solid
ground, Harry decided to take him no further.

The cold rain chilled him to the bone, and after awhile he determined to
try and make his way forward on foot, in hopes of finding, if not a
human habitation, some walls or bushes where he could obtain shelter
until the weather cleared. He fastened the reins to a small shrub, took
off the saddle and laid it on the grass, spread the horse rug over the
animal to protect it as far as possible, and then started on his way. He
had heard of Irish bogs extending for many miles, and deep enough to
engulf men and animals who might stray among them, and he felt that his
position was a serious one.

He blamed himself now for not having halted immediately he perceived
that he had missed the road. The only guide that he had as to the
direction he should take was the wind. On his way it had been in his
face, and he determined now to keep it at his back, not because that was
probably the way to safety, but because he could see more easily where
he was going, and he thought by continuing steadily in one direction he
might at last gain firm ground. His view extended but a few yards round
him, and he soon found that his plan of proceeding in a straight line
was impracticable. Often quagmires of black ooze, or spaces covered with
light grass, which were, he found, still more treacherous, barred his
way, and he was compelled to make considerable detours to the right or
left in order to pass them. Sometimes widths of sluggish water were met
with. For a long time Harry continued his way, leaping lightly from tuft
to tuft, where the grass grew thickest, sometimes wading knee-deep in
the slush and feeling carefully every foot lest he should get to a depth
whence he should be unable to extricate himself. Every now and then he
shouted at the top of his voice, in hopes that he might be heard by some
human being. For hours he struggled on. He was now exhausted with his
efforts, and the thickening darkness told him that day was fading. From
the time he had left his horse he had met with no bush of sufficient
height to afford him the slightest shelter.

Just as he was thinking whether he had not better stop where he was,
and sit down on the firmest tuft he could find and wait for morning,
when perhaps the rainstorm might cease and enable him to see where he
was, he heard, and at no very great distance, the sudden bray of a
donkey. He turned at once in the direction of the sound, with renewed
hopes, giving a loud shout as he did so. Again and again he raised his
voice, and presently heard an answering shout. He called again, and in
reply heard some shouts in Irish, probably questions, but to these he
could give no answer. Shouting occasionally, he made his way toward the
voice, but the bog seemed more difficult and treacherous than ever, and
at last he reached a spot where further advance seemed absolutely
impossible. It was now nearly dark, and Harry was about to sit down in
despair, when suddenly a voice sounded close to him. He answered again,
and immediately a barefooted boy sprang to his side from behind. The boy
stood astonished at Harry's appearance. The latter was splashed and
smeared from head to foot with black mire, for he had several times
fallen. His broad hat drooped a sodden mass over his shoulders, the
dripping feather adding to its forlorn appearance. His high riding boots
were gone, having long since been abandoned in the tenacious ooze in
which they had stuck; his ringlets fell in wisps on his shoulder.

After staring at him for a minute, the boy said something in Irish.
Harry shook his head.

His guide then motioned him to follow him. For some time it seemed to
Harry that he was retracing his steps. Then they turned, and by what
seemed a long detour, at last reached firmer ground. A minute or two
later they were walking along a path, and presently stopped before the
door of a cabin, by which two men were standing. They exchanged a word
or two with the boy, and then motioned to Harry to enter. A peat fire
was burning on the hearth, and a woman, whose age Harry from her aspect
thought must be enormous, was crouched on a low stool beside it. He
threw off his riding cloak and knelt by her, and held his hands over the
fire to restore the circulation. One of the men lighted a candle formed
of rushes dipped in tallow. Harry paid no heed to them until he felt the
warmth returning to his limbs. Then he rose to his feet and addressed
them in English. They shook their heads. Perceiving how wet he was one
of them drew a bottle from under the thatch, and pouring some of its
contents into a wooden cup offered it to him. Harry put it to his lips.
At first it seemed that he was drinking a mixture of liquid fire and
smoke, and the first swallow nearly choked him. However he persevered,
and soon felt the blood coursing more rapidly in his veins. Finding the
impossibilty of conversing, he again sat down by the fire and waited the
course of events. He had observed that as he entered his young guide
had, in obedience probably to the orders of one of the men, darted away
into the mist.

The minutes passed slowly, and not a word was spoken in the cottage. An
hour went by, and then a tramp of feet was heard, and, accompanied by
the boy, eight or ten men entered. All carried pikes. Between them and
the men already in the hut an eager conversation took place. Harry felt
far from easy. The aspect of the men was wild in the extreme. Their hair
was long and unkempt, and fell in straggling masses over their
shoulders. Presently one, who appeared to be the leader, approached
Harry, who had now risen to his feet, and crossed himself on the
forehead and breast. Harry understood by the action that he inquired if
he was a Catholic, and in reply shook his head.

An angry murmur ran through the men. Harry repressed his inclination to
place his hand on his pistols, which he had on alighting from his horse
taken from the holsters and placed in his belt. He felt that even with
these and his sword, he should be no match for the men around him. Then
he bethought of the letters of which he was a bearer. Taking them from
his pocket he held them out. "Ormonde," he said, looking at the men.

No gleam of intelligence brightened their faces at the word.

Then he said "Butler," the Irish family name of the earl. Two or three
of the men spoke together, and Harry thought that there was some
comprehension of his meaning. Then he read aloud the addresses of the
letters, and the exclamations which followed each named showed that
these were familiar to the men. A lively conversation took place between
them, and the leader presently approached and held out his hand.

"Thomas Blake, Killicuddery," he said. This was the address of one of
the letters, and Harry at once gave it him. It was handed to the boy,
with a few words of instruction. The lad at once left the hut. The men
seemed to think that for the time there was nothing more to be done,
laid their pikes against the wall, and assumed, Harry thought, a more
friendly aspect. He reciprocated their action, by unbuckling his belt
and laying aside his sword and pistols. Fresh peats were piled on the
fire, another candle was lit, and the party prepared to make themselves
comfortable. The bottle and wooden cup were again produced, and the
owner of the hut offered some black bread to his visitor.




 

THE SIEGE OF DROGHEDA.


Under the influence of the warm, close air of the hut, and the spirits
he had taken, Harry soon felt drowsiness stealing over him, and the
leader, perceiving this, pointed to a heap of dried fern lying in the
corner of the hut. Harry at once threw himself on it, and in a very few
minutes was sound asleep. When he awoke daylight was streaming in
through the door of the hut. Its inmates were for the most part sitting
as when he had last seen them, and Harry supposed that they had talked
all night. The atmosphere of the hut was close and stifling, and Harry
was glad to go to the door and breathe the fresh air outside.

The weather had changed, and the sun, which had just risen, was shining
brightly. The hut stood at the foot of a long range of stony hills,
while in front stretched, as far as the eye could see, an expanse of
brown bog. A bridle path ran along at the foot of the hills. An hour
later two figures were seen approaching along this. The one was a
mounted horseman, the other running in front of him, at a long, easy
trot, was Harry's guide of the preceding evening.

On reaching the cottage the gentleman on horseback alighted, and,
advancing to Harry, said:

"Captain Furness, I am heartily sorry to hear that you have had what
must have been a disagreeable adventure. The lad here who brought your
letter told me that you were regarded as a prisoner, and considered to
be a Protestant emissary. I am Tom Blake, and I live nearly twenty miles
from here. That is the reason why I was not here sooner. I was keeping
it up with some friends last night, and had just gone to bed when the
messenger arrived, and my foolish servants pretended I was too drunk to
be woke. However, when they did rouse me, I started at once."

"And has that boy gone forty miles on foot since last night?" Harry
asked, in surprise.

"Oh, that's nothing," Mr. Blake said. "Give him half an hour's rest, and
he'd keep up with us back to Killicuddery. But where is your horse, and
how did you get into this mess? The boy tells me he found you in the
bog."

Harry related his adventures.

"You have had a lucky escape indeed," Mr. Blake said. "There are places
in that bog thirty feet deep. I would not try to cross it for a thousand
pounds on a bright day, and how you managed to do so through the mist
yesterday is more than I can imagine. Now, the first thing is to get
your horse. I must apologize for not having brought one, but the fact
is, my head was not exactly clear when I started, and I had not taken in
the fact that you'd arrived on foot. My servant was more thoughtful. He
had heard from the boy that an English gentleman was here, and judging
that the larder was not likely to be stocked, he put a couple of bottles
of claret, a cold chicken, and some bread into my wallet, so we can have
breakfast while they are looking for your horse. The ride has sharpened
my appetite."

Mr. Blake now addressed a few words in Irish to the men clustered round
the door of the hut. One of them climbed to the top of the hill, and
presently shouted down some instructions, and another at once started
across the bog.

"They see your horse," Mr. Blake said, "but we shall have to wait for
two or three hours. It is some four miles off, and they will have to
make a long detour to bring it back."

Mr. Blake now distributed some silver among the men, and these, with the
exception of the master of the house, soon afterward left. Harry
heartily enjoyed his breakfast, and in cheery chat with his host the
time passed pleasantly until the peasant returned with the horse and
saddle. The horse was rubbed down with dry fern, and a lump of black
bread given him to eat.

"What can I do for the boy?" Harry asked. "I owe him my life, for I was
so thoroughly drenched and cold that I question whether I should have
lived till morning out in that bog."

"The boy thinks nothing of it," Mr. Blake said. "A few hundred yards
across the bog night or day is nothing to him."

Harry gave the lad a gold piece, which he looked at in wonder.

"He has never seen such a thing before," Mr. Blake laughed. "There,
Mickey," he said in Irish, "that's enough to buy you a cow, and you've
only got to build a cabin and take a wife to start life as a man."

The boy said something in Irish.

"I thought so," Mr. Blake laughed. "You haven't got rid of him yet. He
wants to go as your servant."

Harry laughed too. The appearance of the lad in his tattered garments
was in contrast indeed to the usual aspect of a gentleman's retainer.

"You'll find him useful," Mr. Blake said. "He will run errands for you
and look after your horse. These lads can be faithful to death. You
cannot do better than take him."

Mickey's joy when he was told that he might accompany the English
gentleman was extreme. He handed the money he had received to his
father, said a few words of adieu to him, and then started on ahead of
the horses.

"He had better wait and come on later," Harry said. "He must be utterly
tired now."

Mr. Blake shouted after the boy, who turned round, laughed, and shook
his head, and again proceeded on his way.

"He can keep up with us," Mr. Blake said. "That horse of yours is more
fagged than he is."

Harry soon found that this was the case, and it took them nearly four
hours' riding before they reached Killicuddery. Here a dozen barefooted
men and boys ran out at their approach, and took the horses. It was a
large, straggling house, as good as that inhabited by the majority of
English gentlemen, but Harry missed the well-kept lawn, the trim
shrubberies, and the general air of neatness and order to which he was
accustomed.

"Welcome to Killicuddery," Mr. Blake said, as he alighted. "Believe me,
Captain Furness, you won't find the wild Irish, now you are fairly among
them, such dreadful creatures as they have been described to you. Well,
Norah," he continued, as a girl some sixteen years of age bounded down
the steps to meet him, "how goes it with you this morning?"

"As well as could be expected, father, considering that you kept us
awake half the night with your songs and choruses. None of the others
are down yet, and it's past twelve o'clock. It's downright shameful."

"Norah, I'm surprised at you," Mr. Blake said, laughing. "What will
Captain Furness think of Irish girls when he hears you speaking so
disrespectfully to your father. This is my daughter Norah, Captain
Furness, who is, I regret to say, a wild and troublesome girl. This, my
dear, is Captain Furness, a king's officer, who has fought through all
the battles of the war."

"And who has lately been engaged in a struggle with an Irish bog," the
girl said, laughing, for Harry's gay dress was discolored and stained
from head to foot.

Harry laughed also.

"I certainly got the worst of that encounter, Miss Norah, as indeed has
been the case in most of those in which I have been engaged. I never
felt much more hopeless, when I thought I should have to pass the night
sitting on a tuft of grass with mud and mist all round me, except when I
was once nearly baked to death in, company with Prince Rupert."

"It must have been a large oven," the girl laughed; "but come in now. I
am sure you will both be ready for breakfast. But papa would keep you
chattering here all day if I would let him."

Mr. Blake, Harry soon found, was a widower, and his house was presided
over by his eldest daughter, Kathleen, to whom Harry was introduced on
entering the house. As it was now some hours since they had eaten the
food which Mr. Blake had brought, they were quite ready for another
meal, at which they were soon joined by six or eight other gentlemen,
who had been sleeping in the house. Breakfast over, Harry retired to his
room, put on a fresh suit from his wallet, and rejoined his companions,
when a sort of council of war was held. Harry learned that there was no
difficulty as to men, as any number of these could be recruited among
the peasantry. There was, however, an entire absence of any arms save
pikes. Harry knew how good a weapon are these when used by steady and
well-disciplined men. The matchlocks of those days were cumbrous arms,
and it was at the point of the pike that battles were then always
decided.

Mr. Blake begged Harry to make his house his headquarters during his
stay in the West, and the invitation was gladly accepted. The letters
of which he was the bearer were dispatched to their destinations, and a
few days after his arrival the recipients called upon him, and he found
himself overwhelmed with invitations and offers of hospitality. The time
therefore passed very pleasantly.

A few men were found in Galway who had served in the wars. These were
made sergeants of the newly raised regiment, which was five hundred
strong. This was not embodied, but five central places were chosen at a
distance from each other, and at these the peasants assembled for drill.
Several of the sons of the squires received commissions as officers, and
the work of drilling went on briskly, Harry superintending that at each
center by turns. In the evenings there were generally dinner parties at
the houses of one or other of the gentry, and Harry greatly enjoyed the
life. So some months passed.

In July the news came that the Earl of Ormonde's force outside Dublin
had been routed by the garrison, under General Jones, the governor, and
shortly afterward Harry received orders to march with the regiment to
join the earl, who, as the king's representative, forwarded him at the
same time a commission as its colonel, and the order to command it.

It was on the 13th of August that Harry with his force joined the army
of Ormonde, and the next day the news came that Cromwell had landed at
Dublin, and had issued a bloodthirsty proclamation against the Irish.
Harry was at once ordered to march with his regiment to Tredah, now
called Drogheda, a seaport about forty miles north of Dublin. At this
town Harry found in garrison twenty-five hundred English troops, under
the command of Sir Arthur Ashton, an old Royalist officer, he had lost a
leg in the king's service.

During the six months he had passed in the West Harry had found Mike an
invaluable servant. He had, of course, furnished him with decent suits
of clothes, but although willing to wear shoes in the house, nothing
could persuade Mike to keep these on his feet when employed without. As
a messenger he was of the greatest service, carrying Harry's missives to
the various posts as quickly as they could have been taken by a
horseman. During that time he had picked up a great deal of English, and
his affection for his master was unbounded. He had, as a matter of
course, accompanied Harry on his march east, and was ready to follow him
to the end of the world if need be.

The garrison of Drogheda employed themselves busily in strengthening the
town to the utmost, in readiness for the siege that Cromwell would, they
doubted not, lay to it. In September Cromwell moved against the place.
He was prepared to carry out the campaign in a very different spirit to
that with which he had warred in England. For years Ireland had been
desolated by the hordes of half-savage men, who had for that time been
burning, plundering, and murdering on the pretext of fighting for or
against the king. Cromwell was determined to strike so terrible a blow
as would frighten Ireland into quietude. He knew that mildness would be
thrown away upon this people, and he defended his course, which excited
a thrill of horror in England, upon the grounds that it was the most
merciful in the end. Certainly, nowhere else had Cromwell shown himself
a cruel man. In England the executions in cold blood had not amounted to
a dozen in all. The common men on both sides were, when taken prisoners,
always allowed to depart to their homes, and even the officers were not
treated with harshness. It may be assumed that his blood was fired by
the tales of massacre and bloodshed which reached him when he landed.
The times were stern, and the policy of conciliating rebels and
murderers by weak concessions was not even dreamed of. Still, no excuses
or pleas of public policy can palliate Cromwell's conduct at Drogheda
and Wexford. He was a student and expounder of the Bible, but it was in
the old Testament rather than the new that precedents for the massacre
at Drogheda must be sought for. No doubt it had the effect at the time
which Cromwell looked for, but it left an impression upon the Irish mind
which the lapse of over two centuries has not obliterated. The wholesale
massacres and murders perpetrated by Irishmen on Irishmen have long
since been forgotten, but the terrible vengeance taken by Cromwell and
his saints upon the hapless towns of Drogheda and Wexford will never be
forgotten by the Irish, among whom the "curse of Cromwell" is still the
deadliest malediction one man can hurl at another.

Cromwell's defenders who say that he warred mildly and mercifully in
England, according to English ideas, and that he fought the Irish only
as they fought each other, must be hard driven when they set up such a
defense. The fact that Murrogh O'Brien, at the capture of Cashel,
murdered the garrison who had laid down their arms, and three thousand
of the defenseless citizens, including twenty priests who had fled to
the cathedral for refuge, affords no excuse whatever for the
perpetration of equal atrocities by Cromwell, and no impartial historian
can deny that these massacres are a foul and hideous blot in the history
of a great and, for the most part, a kind and merciful man.

Upon arriving before Drogheda on the 2d of September Cromwell at once
began to throw up his batteries, and opened fire on the 10th. His
artillery was abundant, and was so well served that early the same
afternoon two practical breaches were made, the one in the east, in the
wall of St. Mary's Churchyard, the other to the south, in the wall of the
town. Sir Arthur Ashton had placed Harry in command at St. Mary's
Churchyard, and seeing that the wall would soon give way under the fire
of the enemy's artillery, he set his men to throw up an earthwork
behind.

Seven hundred of the Roundheads advanced to the assault, but so heavy
was the fire that Harry's troops poured upon them that they were forced
to fall back with great slaughter. At the other breach they were also
repulsed, but attacking again in great force they made their way in.
Near this spot was an ancient tumulus, called the Hill Mount. The sides
of this were defended by strong palisades, and here the Royalists,
commanded by Sir Arthur Ashton himself, opposed a desperate resistance
to the enemy. These, supported by the guns on the walls, which they
turned against the Mount, made repeated attacks, but were as often
repulsed. The loss, however, of the defenders was great, and seeing that
fresh troops were constantly brought against them they at last lost
heart and surrendered, on promise of their lives; a promise which was
not kept, as all were immediately massacred.

Up to this time Harry had successfully repulsed every attack made upon
the other breach, but at length the news of the Roundheads' success at
the Mount reached both assailants and defenders.

With exulting shouts the Roundheads poured over the wall. The garrison,
headed by Harry and the other officers, strove hard to drive them back,
but it was useless. Cromwell and Ireton were in the van of their troops,
and these, accustomed to victory, hewed their way through the ranks of
the besieged. Many of them lost heart, and, throwing down their arms,
cried for quarter. With shouts of "No quarter!" "Hew down the
Amalakites!" "Strike, and spare not!" the Roundheads cut down their now
defenseless foes. Maddened at the sight, the besieged made another
desperate effort at resistance, and for awhile fought so stoutly that
the Roundheads could gain no ground of them.

Presently, however, a party of the enemy who had forced their way over
the wall at another point took them in rear. Then the garrison fled in
all directions pursued by their victorious enemy, who slaughtered every
man they overtook. Mike had kept close to Harry through the whole of the
struggle. He had picked up a pike from a fallen man, and had more than
once, when Harry was nearly surrounded by his foes, dashed forward and
rid him of one of the most pressing. Seeing, by the general slaughter
which was going on, that the Roundhead soldiers must have received
orders from their general to give no quarter, Harry determined to sell
his life dearly, and rushed into a church where a score of the English
soldiers were taking refuge. The door was closed and barricaded with
chairs and benches, and from the windows the men opened fire upon the
Roundheads, who were engaged in slaying all--men, women and children,
without mercy. Soon, from every house around, a heavy fire was poured
into the church, and several of those within fell dead under the fire.
Under cover of this, the Roundheads attacked the door with axes. Many
were killed by the fire of the defenders, but as the door yielded, Harry
called these from their post, and with them ascended the belfry tower.
Here they prepared to fight to the last.

Looking from a window, Harry beheld a sight which thrilled him with
horror. Gathered round a cross, standing in an open space, were two
hundred women on their knees. Even while Harry looked a body of
Cromwell's saints fell upon them, hewing and cutting with their swords,
and thrusting with their pikes, and did not desist while one remained
alive. And these were the men who had the name of God ever on their
lips! When the dreadful massacre began Harry turned shuddering from the
window, and with white face and set teeth nerved himself to fight to the
last. Already the door had been beaten down, and the assailants had
streamed into the church. Then a rush of heavy feet was heard on the
stairs. Assembled round its top stood Harry and the twelve men
remaining. Each knew now that there was no hope of quarter, and fought
with the desperation of men who cared only to sell their lives dearly.
Fast as the Roundheads poured up the stairs, they fell, pierced by pike,
or shot down by musket ball. For half an hour the efforts continued, and
then the Roundheads, having lost over fifty men, fell back. Three times
during the day the attack was renewed, and each time repulsed with the
same terrible slaughter. Between the intervals the defenders could hear
the never-ceasing sound of musket and pistol firing, as house after
house, defended to the last by desperate men, was stormed; while loud,
even above the firing, rose the thrilling shrieks of dying women and
children.

In all the history of England, from its earliest times, there is no such
black and ghastly page as that of the sack of Drogheda. Even supposing
Cromwell's assertion that he wished only to terrify the Irish rebels to
be true, no shadow of an excuse can be pleaded for the massacre of the
women and children, or for that of the English Royalists who formed
five-sixths of the garrison.

All through the night occasional shrieks and pistol shots could be
heard, as the wretched people who had hidden themselves in closets and
cellars were discovered and murdered. No further assault was made upon
the church tower, nor was there any renewal of it next morning. As hour
after hour passed on Harry concluded that, deterred by the great loss
which his men had already sustained in endeavoring to capture the post,
Cromwell had determined to reduce it by starvation.

Already the defenders were, from the effects of exertion and excitement,
half-mad with thirst. As the day went on their sufferings became
greater, but there was still no thought of surrender. The next day two
of them leaped from the top of the tower and were killed by their fall.
Then Harry saw that it was better to give in.

"My lads," he said, "it is better to go down and die by a bullet-shot
than to suffer these agonies of thirst, with only death as the issue. We
must die. Better to die in our senses as men, than mad like wild beasts
with thirst. Mike, my lad, I am sorry to have brought you to this pass."

Mike put his parched lips to his master's hand.

"It is not your fault, master. My life is no differ to any."

The men agreed to Harry's proposal. There was a discussion whether they
should go down and die fighting, or not; but Harry urged upon them that
it was better not to do so. They were already weak with hunger and
thirst, and it would be more dignified to meet their fate quiet and
unresistingly. They accordingly laid by their arms, and, preceded by
Harry, descended the stairs.

The noise of their footsteps warned the soldiers in the church below of
their coming, and these formed in a semicircle round the door to receive
the expected onslaught. When they saw that the Royalists were unarmed
they lowered their weapons, and an officer said: "Take these men out
into the street, and shoot them there, according to the general's
orders."

Calmly and with dignity Harry marched at the head of his little party
into the street. They were ranged with their backs to the church, and a
firing party took their places opposite to them.

The officer was about to give the order, when a divine in a
high-steepled hat came up. He looked at the prisoners, and then rapidly
advanced between the lines and gazed earnestly at Harry.

"Is your name Master Furness?" he asked.

"I am Colonel Furness, an officer of his majesty Charles II.," Harry
said coldly. "What then?"

"I am Ebenezer Stubbs," the preacher said. "Do you not remember how
seven years ago you saved my life at the risk of your own in the streets
of Oxford? I promised you then that if the time should come I would do
as good a turn to yourself. Captain Allgood," he said, "I do beseech you
to stay this execution until I have seen the general. I am, as you know,
his private chaplain, and I am assured that he will not be wroth with
you for consenting to my request."

The influence of the preacher with Cromwell was well known, and the
officer ordered his men to ground arms, although they muttered and
grumbled to themselves at the prospect of mercy being shown to men who
had killed so many of their companions. A quarter of a hour later the
preacher returned with an order from the general for the prisoners to be
placed in durance.

"I have obtained your life," the preacher said, "but even to my prayers
the general will grant no more. You and your men are to be sent to the
Bermudas."

Although Harry felt that death itself would be almost preferable to a
life of slavery in the plantations, he thanked the preacher for his
efforts in his behalf. A week later Harry, with the eight men who had
taken with him, and twenty-seven others who been discovered in
hiding-places, long after the capture of the place, were placed on board
a ship bound for the Bermudas, the sole survivors of the garrison--three
thousand strong--and of the inhabitants of Drogheda.




 

SLAVES IN THE BERMUDAS.


The Good Intent, upon which Harry Furness with thirty-five other
Royalist prisoners were embarked, was a bark of two hundred tons. She
carried, in addition to the prisoners, sixty soldiers, who were going
out to strengthen the garrison of Barbadoes. The prisoners were crowded
below, and were only allowed to come on deck in batches of five or six
for an hour at a time. Four of them had died on the way, and the others
were greatly reduced in strength when they landed. As soon as they
reached Bermuda the prisoners were assigned as slaves to some of the
planters most in favor of the Commonwealth. Four or five were allotted
to each, and Harry having placed Mike next to him at the end of the
line, when they were drawn up on landing, they were, together with two
others of the soldiers who had defended the tower of Drogheda with him,
assigned to the same master.

"He is an evil-looking scoundrel," Harry said to the Irish boy. "He
looks even more sour and hypocritical than do the Puritans at home. We
have had a lesson of what their idea of mercy and Christianity is when
they get the upper hand. I fear we have a hard time before us, my lad."

The four prisoners were marched to the center of the island, which
seemed to Harry to be, as near as he could tell, about the size of the
Isle of Wight. Their new master rode in front of them, while behind
rode his overseer, with pistols at his holsters, and a long whip in his
hand. Upon their way they passed several negroes working in the fields,
a sight which mightily astonished Mike, who had never before seen these
black creatures. At that time the number of negroes in the island was
comparatively small, as the slave trade was then in its infancy. It was
the want of labor which made the planters so glad to obtain the services
of the white prisoners from England. Many of the slaves in the island
had been kidnaped as boys at the various ports in England and Scotland,
the infamous traffic being especially carried on in Scotland.

When they reached the plantation the horsemen alighted in the courtyard
of the residence, and the planter, whose name was Zachariah Stebbings,
told the overseer to take them to the slave quarters.

"You will have," he said harshly, "to subdue your pride here, and to
work honestly and hard, or the lash will become acquainted with your
backs."

"Look you here, Master Stebbings, if such be your name," Harry said, "a
word with you at the beginning. We are exiled to this place, and given
into servitude to you through no crime but that of having fought bravely
for his majesty King Charles. We are men who care not greatly for our
lives, and we four, with seven others, did, as you may learn, defend the
tower of Drogheda for two days against the whole army of Cromwell, and
did only yield to thirst, and not to force. You may judge then, of our
mettle from that fact. Now, hark you; having fallen into this strait, we
are willing to conform to our condition, and to give you fair and honest
work to the best of our powers; but mind you, if one finger be laid on
us in anger, if so much as the end of a whip touch one of us, we have
sworn that we will slay him so ventures, and you also, should you
countenance it , even though afterward we be burned at the stake for
doing it. That is our bargain; see you that you keep to it."

So stern and determined were Harry's words, so fierce and haughty his
tone, that the planter and his overseer both turned pale and shrank
back. They saw at once the manner of men with whom they had to deal, and
felt that the threat would be carried out to the fullest. Muttering some
inarticulate reply, the planter turned and entered the house, and the
overseer, with a dogged, crestfallen look, led the way to the slave
quarters. The place assigned to them was a long hut, the sides lightly
constructed of woven boughs, with a thick thatch overhead. Along one
side extended a long sloping bench, six feet wide. This was the bed of
the slaves.

An hour afterward the other inmates of the hut entered. They consisted
of four white men who had been kidnaped as boys, and two who had been
apprentices, sent out, as Harry soon learned, for their share in the
rising in the city, which he had headed. The negroes on the estate, some
twenty in number, were confined in another hut. There were, besides,
four guards, one of whom kept sentry at night over the hut, while
another with a loaded firearm stood over them while they worked. The
garrison of the island consisted, as Harry had learned before landing,
of two hundred and fifty soldiers, besides the militia, consisting of
the planters, their overseers and guards, who would number altogether
about five hundred men.

The next day the work in the fields began. It consisted of hoeing the
ground between the rows of young sugar canes and tobacco plants. The sun
was extremely powerful, and the perspiration soon flowed in streams from
the newcomers. They worked, however, steadily and well, and in a manner
which gave satisfaction even to their master and his overseer. Harry
had impressed upon his two men and Mike the importance of doing nothing
which could afford their employer a fair opportunity for complaint. He
would not, Harry felt sure, venture to touch them after the warning he
had given, but he might send one or all of them back to the town, where
they would be put to work as refractory slaves on the fortifications,
and where their lot would be far harder than it would be on the
plantation. He urged upon them above all things to have patience; sooner
or later the people of England would, he felt sure, recall the young
king, and then they would be restored to their country. But even before
that some mode of escape, either by ship, or by raising an insurrection
in concert with the white slaves scattered through the island, might
present itself.

The white slaves and negroes were kept as far as possible apart during
their work in all the plantations in the island. The whites were deemed
dangerous, and were watched with the greatest care. The blacks were a
light-hearted and merry race, not altogether discontented with their
position, and the planters did their utmost to prevent the white slaves
having communication with them, and stirring them up to discontent and
rebellion. At the same time they were not absolutely forbidden to speak.
Each slave had a small plot of ground assigned to him near the huts, and
on these, after the day's work was over, they raised vegetables for
their own consumption.

Mike, who, as a lad, was much less closely watched than the men, soon
made friends with the negroes. He was full of fun and mischief, and
became a prime favorite with them. He learned that at night, as no watch
was kept over them, they would often steal away and chat with the
negroes on other plantations, and that so long as there were no signs
of discontent, and they did their work cheerfully, the masters placed no
hindrance upon such meetings. Often at night, indeed, the sound of the
negro singing and music could be heard by the prisoners, the overseers
troubling themselves in no way with the proceedings of their slaves
after nightfall, so long as their amusements did not interfere with
their power of work next morning. Mike heard also that the treatment of
the slaves, both white and black, varied greatly on different
plantations, according to the nature of their masters. In some the use
of the lash was almost unknown, the slaves were permitted many
indulgences, and were happy and contented; while in others they were
harshly and cruelly treated. Mr. Stebbings was considered one of the
worst masters in the island, and, indeed, it was everywhere noticed that
the masters who most conformed to the usages and talk of the Puritans at
home were the most cruel taskmasters to their slaves. Many times Harry
Furness' blood boiled when he saw the lash applied to the bare shoulders
of the slaves, often, as it seemed to him, from pure wantonness on the
part of the overseer. But the latter never once ventured to touch Harry
or his three companions.

Through the negroes Mike learned that to each of the four plantations
adjoining their own four white prisoners had been assigned, and among
these, Harry found, on obtaining their names, were the other five
soldiers who had fought with him at Drogheda.

Mike soon took to going out at night with the negroes, making his way
through a small opening in the light wall of the hut. This was easily
closed up on his return, and by choosing a time when the sentry was on
the other side of the house, he had no difficulty in leaving or entering
unseen. By means of the negroes he opened up a communication with the
other soldiers, and informed them that Colonel Furness bade them hold
themselves in readiness when an opportunity for escape should arise. It
might be weeks or even months before this would come, but the signal
would be given by a fire burning at daybreak upon a hill at no great
distance from the plantation. He bade them use their discretion as to
taking any white slaves with them into their confidence. At nightfall,
after seeing the column of smoke, they were, as best they could, to make
their way from the huts, and meet in a clump of trees near the house of
Mr. Stebbings.

Harry had, indeed formed no distinct plan for escape; but he wished,
should an opportunity offer, to have such a body of men at hand as might
stand him in good stead.

One day, about a month after their arrival on the plantation, the
overseer brutally beat an old negro who was working next to Mike. The
old man resumed his work, but was so feeble that he in vain endeavored
to use his hoe, and the overseer struck him to the ground with the butt
end of his whip. Mike instinctively dropped his hoe and sprang to lift
the old man to his feet. The infuriated overseer, enraged at this
interference, brought down his whip on Mike's head and felled him by the
side of the negro. In an instant Harry sprang forward, armed with his
hoe; the overseer seeing him coming, retreated a step or two, drew his
pistol from his belt and fired--the ball flew close to Harry's ear, and
the latter, whirling his hoe round his head, brought it down with his
full strength upon that of the overseer; the man fell in his tracks as
if smitten with lightning. The guard ran up with his musket pointed, but
Harry's two companions also advanced, armed with their hoes, and the
guard, seeing that even if he shot one, he should assuredly be killed by
the others, took to his heels and ran off to the house. A minute later
Zachariah Stebbings with the four guards was seen running up to the
spot.

"What is this?" he exclaimed furiously. "Mutiny?"

"No, Master Stebbings," Harry said calmly. "We have, as you know, worked
honestly and well, but your brutal overseer has broken the agreement we
made, and struck this lad to the ground without any cause. I, of course,
carried out my part of the compact, though I doubt me the fellow is not
killed. His hat is a thick one, and may have saved his skull. You had
best leave matters alone. I and my three men are a match for you and
your guards, even though they have guns, and you best know if our
services are worth anything to you."

The planter hesitated. He was unwilling indeed to lose four of his best
slaves, and he knew that whether he attacked them now, or whether he
reported the case to the commandant of the island, he would assuredly do
this. After a moment's hesitation, he said:

"The fool has brought it on himself. Do you," turning to the guards,
"lift him up and carry him to the house, and let old Dinah see to his
head. It is an ugly cut," he said, leaning over him, "but will do him no
harm, though it will not add to his beauty."

The blow had indeed been a tremendous one, and had it alighted fairly on
the top of his head, would assuredly have cleft the skull, in spite of
the protection afforded by the hat. It had, however, fallen somewhat on
one side, and had shorn off the scalp, ear, and part of the cheek. It
was three weeks before the overseer again resumed his duty, and he cast
such a deadly look at Harry as assured him that he would have his life
when the occasion offered.

Two days later, when the planter happened to be in the field with the
overseer, two gentlemen rode from the house, where they had been to
inquire for him. The sobriety of their garments showed that they
belonged to the strictest sect of the Puritans.

"I have ridden hither," one said, with a strong nasal twang, "Zachariah
Stebbings, having letters of introduction to you from the governor.
These will tell that I am minded to purchase an estate in the island.
The governor tells me that maybe you would be disposed to sell, and that
if not, I might see the methods of work and culture here, and learn from
you the name of one disposed to part with his property."

At the first words of the speaker Harry Furness had started, and dropped
his hoe; without, however, looking round, he picked it up and applied
himself to his work.

"I should not be unwilling to sell," the planter answered, "for a fair
price, but the profits are good, and are likely to be better, for I hear
that large numbers of malignants, taken by the sword of the Lord
Cromwell at Dundalk and Waterford in Ireland, will be sent here, and
with more labor to till the fields, our profits will increase."

"I have heard," the newcomer said, "that some of the ungodly followers
of the man Charles have already been sent here."

"That is so," the planter agreed. "I myself, standing well in the favor
of the governor, have received four of them; that boy, the two men next
to him, and that big man working there. He is a noted malignant, and was
known as Colonel Furness."

"Truly he is a stalwart knave," the other remarked.

"Ay is he," the planter said; "but his evil fortune has not as yet
altogether driven out the evil spirit within him. He is a man of wrath,
and the other day he smote nigh to death my overseer, whose head is, as
you see, still bandaged up."

"Truly he is a son of Belial," the other argued, but in a tone in which
a close observer might have perceived a struggle to keep down laughter.
"I warrant me, you punished him heartily for such an outbreak."

"To tell you the truth," the planter said, "the man is a good workman,
and like to an ox in his strength. The three others were by his side,
and also withstood me. Had I laid a complaint before the governor they
would all have been shot, or put on the roads to work, and I should have
lost their labor. My overseer was in the wrong, and struck one of them
first, so 'twas better to say naught about the matter. And now will you
walk me to the house, where I can open the letter of the governor, and
talk more of the business you have in hand."

The instant the man had spoken Harry had recognized the voice of his old
friend Jacob, and doubted not, though he had not ventured to look round,
that he who accompanied him was William Long; and he guessed that
hearing he had been sent with the other captives spared at the massacre
of Drogheda to the Bermudas, they had come out to try and rescue him. So
excited was he at the thought that it was with difficulty he could
continue steadily at his work through the rest of the day. When at
nightfall he was shut up in the hut with his companions, he told them
that the Puritan they had seen was a friend of his own, a captain in his
troop, and that he doubted not that deliverance was at hand. He charged
Mike at once to creep forth to join the negroes, and to bid them tell
one of their color who served in the house to take an opportunity to
whisper to one of his master's guests--for he learned that they were
biding there for the night, "Be in the grove near the house when all are
asleep." The negroes willingly undertook the commission, and Mike
rejoined the party in the hut. Two hours later Harry himself crept out
through the hole, which they had silently and at great pains enlarged
for the purpose, and made his way round to the grove. There were still
lights in the house, and the negroes in their hut were talking and
singing. An hour later the lights were extinguished, and soon afterward
he saw a figure stealthily approaching.

"Jacob," he whispered, as the man entered the shelter of the trees, and
in another moment he was clasped in the arms of his faithful friend. For
some time their hearts were too full to speak, and then Harry leading
his companion to the side of the wood furthest from the house, they sat
down and began to talk. After the first questions as to the health of
Harry's father had been answered, Jacob went on:

"We saw by the dispatch of Cromwell to Parliament that the sole
survivors of the sack of Drogheda, being one officer, Colonel Furness, a
noted malignant, and thirty-five soldiers, had been sent in slavery to
the Bermudas. So, of course, we made up our minds to come and look after
you. Through Master Fleming I obtained letters, introducing to the
governor the worshipful Grace-be-to-the-Lord Hobson and Jeremiah
Perkins, who desired to buy an estate in the Bermudas. So hither we
came, William Long and I; and now, Harry, what do you advise to be done?
I find that the ships which leave the port are searched before they
leave, and that guards are placed over them while they load, to see that
none conceal themselves there, and I see not, therefore, how you can
well escape in that way. There seem to be no coasting craft here, or we
might seize one of these and make for sea."

"No," Harry replied. "They allow none such in the port, for fear that
they might be so taken. There are large rowing boats, pulled by twelve
slaves, that come to take produce from the plantations farthest from the
port round to ships there. But it would be madness to trust ourselves
to sea in one of these. We should either die of hunger and thirst, or be
picked up again by their cruisers. The only way would be to seize a
ship."

"That is what William Long and I have been thinking of," Jacob said.
"But there is a shrewd watch kept up, and the ships are moored under the
guns of the battery. We passed, on our way hither, a bark bringing a
number of prisoners taken at Waterford. She is a slow sailer, and, by
the calculations of our captain, will not arrive here for some days
yet."

"If we could intercept her," Harry said thoughtfully, "we might, with
the aid of the prisoners, overcome the guard, and then turning her head,
sail for Holland."

"That might be done," Jacob assented, "if you have force enough."

"I can bring forty men," Harry answered. "There are eight here, and we
have communication with those in the neighboring plantations, who are
ready to join me in any enterprise. That should be enough."

"It is worth trying," Jacob said. "I will hire a rowboat, as if to bring
round a cargo of sugar from this plantation to the port. I will station
a man on the highest point of the hills to give me notice when a sail is
in sight. He may see it thence forty miles away. The winds are light and
baffling, and she will make slow progress, and may bring up outside the
port that night, but assuredly will not enter until next morning. The
instant I know it is in sight I will ride over here, and William Long
will start with the barge from the port. When you see me come, do you
send round word to the others to meet at midnight on the beach, where
you will see the boat drawn up. Can you let your friends know speedily?"

"Yes," Harry replied. "My signal was to have been given at daybreak, but
I will send round word of the change of hour, and that if, when they
are locked up for the night, they see a fire burning on the point
agreed, they are to meet on the shore at midnight. Tell William Long to
haul the boat up, and let the rowers go to sleep on the shore. We will
seize them noiselessly. Then we will row along the shore till off the
port, and at first daybreak out to the ship if she be at anchor, or away
to meet her if she be not yet come. They will think that we bear a
message from the port."

After some further discussion of details the friends separated, and the
next day Mike sent round by the negroes the news of the change of plans.
Two days later Jacob rode up to the plantation. He had upon the first
occasion told Stebbings that the sum he asked for the estate seemed to
him too high, but that he would return to talk it over with him, after
he had seen other properties. Immediately upon his arrival, which
happened just as the slaves returned from work, Mike sent off one of the
negro boys, who had already collected a pile of brushwood on the beacon
hill. Half an hour later a bright flame shone out on its summit.

"I wonder what that means?" the planter, who was sitting at dinner in
his veranda with Jacob, said angrily.

"It looks like a signal fire," Jacob remarked calmly. "I have heard that
they are sometimes lit on the seacoast of England as a signal to
smugglers."

"There are no smugglers here," the planter said, "nor any cause for such
a signal."

He clapped his hands, and ordered the black slave who answered to tell
the overseer to take two of the guards, and at once proceed to the fire,
and examine its cause. After dinner was over the planter went out to the
slave huts. All the white men were sitting or lying in the open air,
enjoying the rest after their labor. The negroes were singing or working
in their garden plots, The list was called over, and all found to be
present.

"I expect," the planter said, "that it is only a silly freak of some of
these black fellows to cause uneasiness. It can mean nothing, for the
garrison and militia could put down any rising without difficulty and
there is no hope of escape. In a week we could search every possible
hiding-place in the island."

"Yes, that is an advantage which you have over the planters in Virginia,
to which place I hear our Scottish brethren have sent large numbers of
the malignants. There are great woods stretching no man knoweth how far
inland, and inhabited by fierce tribes of Indians, among whom those who
escape find refuge."

That night when all was still Harry Furness and his seven comrades crept
through the opening in the hut. In the grove they were joined by Jacob.
They then made their way to the seashore, where they saw lying a large
shallop, drawn partly up on the beach. A man was sitting in her, while
many other dark figures lay stretched on the sand near. Harry and his
party moved in that direction, and found that the men from two of the
other plantations had already arrived. A few minutes later the other two
parties arrived. The whole body advanced noiselessly along the shore,
and seized and gagged the sleepers without the least difficulty or
noise. These were bound with ropes from the boat, and laid down one by
one on the sand, at a distance from each other.




 

A SEA FIGHT.


The instant the rowers were secured Harry Furness embraced his faithful
follower William Long. He had learned from Jacob that the ship had
appeared in sight about two in the afternoon, and that it was not
thought likely by the sailors of the port that she would reach it until
the breeze sprang up in the morning, although she might get within a
distance of five or six miles. The whole party had, in concurrence with
Harry's orders, brought with them their hoes, which were the only
weapons that were attainable. It was agreed that their best course would
be to row along the shore until near the lights of the port, then to row
out and lay on their oars half a mile beyond the entrance, where, as it
was a starlight night, they would assuredly see the ship if she had come
to anchor. As soon as the first dawn commenced they were to row out and
meet the ship. Wrappings of cloth were fastened round the rowlocks to
prevent noise, twelve men took the oars, the boat was shoved down into
the sea, and they started on their voyage. The boat rowed but slowly,
and it was, Harry judged, past three o'clock when they reached the point
they had fixed on off the mouth of the harbor. No ship was visible
outside the port, although there was sufficient light to have seen its
masts had it been there.

"We had better go another half-mile further out," he said. "Should they
take it into their heads on shore, when they see us, to send a fast
boat out to inquire what we are doing, it might overtake us before we
could reach the ship."

An hour after they had ceased rowing a faint streak of daylight appeared
in the west, and a ship could be seen about three miles seaward, while
the shore was nearly that distance behind them, for they had been
deceived by the darkness, and were much further out than they had
thought.

"It is all the better," Harry said. "It must be some time before they
think of sending a boat after us, and we shall reach the ship before it
can overtake us."

As soon as it became broad daylight Harry took one of the oars himself,
and all save the twelve rowers, and Jacob and William Long who sat in
the stern, lay down in the bottom of the boat, where some pieces of
matting, used for covering cargo, were thrown over them. There was not
as yet a breath of wind, and the ship's sails hung idly against the
masts. After three-quarters of an hour's hard rowing the barge
approached her side. There were only a few figures on the deck.

"Are you the captain of this vessel?" Jacob asked one who seemed to him
of that condition.

"Ay, ay," the sailor said. "What is the news?"

"I have come off from the island," Jacob answered, "by orders of his
worshipful the governor, to warn you that there is an insurrection among
the slaves of the island, and to bid you not to anchor outside, or to
wait for your papers being examined, but to enter at once."

By this time the boat was alongside, and Jacob climbed on board.

"You have brought some troops with you?" he asked, "They will be
wanted."

"Yes, I have eighty men whom I have brought as a reinforcement to the
garrison of the island, besides a hundred and fifty prisoners from
Waterford, stowed away below the hatches forward. Hullo! why, what is
this? Treason!"

As he spoke Harry, followed by the rowers, swarmed on board armed with
their hoes. The captain and the men round him were at once knocked down.
The sentries over the fore hatchway discharged their muskets, and, with
some of the crew stationed there, made aft. But Harry's party had now
all joined him on deck. A rush was made, and the decks entirely cleared.
A few of the soldiers who came running up through the after hatchway on
hearing the tumult and noise of the fight were beaten down and hurled
below on those following them, and the hatches were slipped on and
secured. Then a triumphant shout of "God and the King!" was raised.

The forehatches were now lifted, and the prisoners invited to come up.
They rushed on deck, delighted and bewildered, for it was the first time
that they had seen the sun since they left England, having been kept
below, where many had died from confinement and bad air, while all were
sorely weakened and brought low. Among them were many officers, of whom
several were known to Harry--although they had some difficulty in
recognizing in the man, bronzed brown by his exposure to the sun and
clad in a tattered shirt and breeches--their former comrade, Harry
Furness. A search was at once made for arms, and ranged in the passage
to the captain's cabin were found twenty muskets for the use of the
crew, together with as many boarding pikes and sabers. Ammunition was
not wanting. The arms were divided among Harry's band of forty men, and
the twenty strongest of those they had rescued. The hoes were given to
the remainder.

The captain, who had by this time recovered from the blow dealt him by
Harry, was now questioned. He was told that if he would consent with his
crew to navigate the vessel to Holland, he should there be allowed to go
free with the ship, which it seemed was his own property; but the cargo
would be sold as a fair prize, to satisfy the needs of his captors. If
he refused, he would be sent with his crew on shore in the barge, and
his ship and cargo would alike be lost to him. The captain had no
hesitation in accepting the first of these alternatives, as he would be,
although no gainer by the voyage, yet no loser either. He told Harry
that for himself he had no sympathy with the rulers in London, and that
he sorely pitied the prisoners he was bringing over.

The hatch was now a little lifted, and the prisoners below summoned to
surrender. This they refused to do. Harry and his men then, with much
labor, lowered a four-pounder carronade down the forehatch, and wheeled
it to within a few feet of the bulkhead which divided that portion where
the prisoners had been confined from the after part. The gun was loaded
to the muzzle with grape, and discharged, tearing a hole through the
bulkhead and killing and wounding many within. Then the officer in
command offered to surrender.

Harry ordered them at once to hand up all their firelocks and other arms
through the hatchway, which was again lifted for the purpose. When those
on deck had armed themselves with those weapons, the prisoners were
ordered to come up, bringing their wounded with them. As they reached
the deck they were passed down into the barge, from which all the oars
save four had been removed. Six of the soldiers had been killed, and the
remainder having entered the barge, where they were stowed as thickly as
they could pack, the head rope was dropped, and they were allowed to row
away. Besides the eighty muskets of the guard, a store of firelocks,
sufficient to arm all on board, was found; these having been intended
for the use of the garrison. A gentle breeze had by this time sprung up
from the land, and the ship's head was turned seaward.

The boat was but half a mile behind them when it was joined by an
eight-oared galley, which had been seen rowing out from the harbor,
whence, doubtless, it had been dispatched to inquire into the errand of
the boat seen rowing off to the ship. After lying alongside the barge
for a minute or two she turned her head, and made back again with all
speed.

"You would have done more wisely," the captain said to Harry, "if you
had retained the prisoners on board until the second boat came
alongside. You could have swamped that, and sent those in it back with
the others, who will not reach shore until late this afternoon, for with
only four oars they will make no way until the land breeze falls."

"It would have been better--far better"--Harry agreed--"but one does not
always think of things at the right time. What ships are there in port,
Jacob?"

"There is the vessel I came by and two others," Jacob replied, "all
about the same size as this, and mounting each as many guns. You have
eight, I see, captain; the one I came out in had ten."

"They will pursue us," the captain said, "you may be sure. It is known
that we are not a fast sailer, and I think, sir, you will have to fight
for it."

"So be it," Harry said. "There are two hundred of us, and though they
might sink the ship, they will assuredly never carry it by boarding.
There is not a man here who would not rather die fighting than spend his
life in slavery on that island."

The vessel had gone about six miles on her course, when from the
topmast the captain announced that the galley had gained the port, now
twelve miles distant. "There is a gun," he said, five minutes later.
"They have taken the alarm now." He then descended to the deck, leaving
a sailor in the tops. Two hours later the latter announced that the
topsails of three ships coming out from the harbor were visible.

"We have nigh thirty miles' start," the captain said. "They will not be
up to us till to-morrow at midday."

"Do you think it would be any use to try to lose them by altering our
course in the night?" Harry asked.

"No," the captain answered. "It is but ten o'clock in the day now. They
will be within ten or twelve miles by nightfall, for the wind is
stronger near the land than it is here, and with their night glasses
they could hardly miss us on a bright starlight night. I am ready to try
if you like, for I do not wish to see the ship knocked into matchwood."

After some deliberation it was determined to hold their course, and as
night came on it was found that escape would have been out of the
question, for the vessels behind had overhauled the Lass of Devon faster
than had been anticipated, and were little more than five miles astern.
They could be plainly seen after darkness set in, with the night
glasses.

"What you must do, captain, is to lay her aboard the first which comes
up," Harry said; "even if they have brought all the garrison we shall be
far stronger than any one of them taken singly."

During the night the pursuing vessels lessened sail and maintained a
position about a mile astern of the chase, evidently intending to attack
in the morning. The day spent in the open air, with plenty of the best
eating and drinking which could be found in the ship, had greatly
reinvigorated the released prisoners, and when at daybreak the vessels
behind were seen to be closing up, all were ready for the fight. The
enemy, sure that their prey could not escape them, did not fire a shot
as they came up in her wake. The two immediately behind were but a
cable's length asunder, and evidently meant to engage on either side.
Harry ordered the greater portion of men below, leaving only sufficient
on deck to fight the guns, to whose use many were well accustomed. The
wind was very light, and the ships were scarcely stealing through the
water.

"We had better fight them broadside to broadside," Harry said; "but keep
on edging down toward the ship to leeward."

The fight began with a heavy fire of musketry from the tops, where, in
all three ships, the best marksmen had been posted. Then, when they were
abreast of each other, the guns opened fire. The vessels were little
more than fifty yards apart. For half an hour the engagement continued
without intermission. Both ships of the enemy had brought all their guns
over to the sides opposed to the Royalist vessel, and fought eighteen
guns to his eight. Fearing to injure each other, both aimed entirely at
the hull of their opponent, while Harry's guns were pointed at the masts
and rigging. The sides of the Lass of Devon were splintered and broken
in all directions, while those of his assailants showed scarcely a shot
mark. The fire of his men in the tops--all old soldiers--had been so
heavy and deadly that they had killed most of the marksmen in the
enemy's tops, and had driven the rest below. All this time the Lass of
Devon was raked by the fire of the third vessel which had come up behind
her, and raked her fore and aft. At the end of the half-hour the
mainmast of the vessel to windward, which had been several times struck,
fell with a crash.

"Now, captain, lay her aboard the ship to leeward."

They had already edged down within twenty yards of this ship, and slowly
as they were moving through the water, in another three or four minutes
the vessels grated together. At Harry's first order the whole of his men
had swarmed on deck, pouring in such a fire of musketry that none could
stand alive at the enemy's tiller to keep her head away as the Lass of
Devon approached. As the vessels touched Harry leaped from the bulwark
on to the deck of the enemy, followed by Jacob and his men. The
Parliamentary troops had also rushed on deck, and, although inferior in
numbers, for they counted but eighty men, they made a sturdy stand.
Gradually, however, they were driven back, when an exclamation from
Mike, who, as usual, was close to Harry, caused him to look round.

The ship behind had, the moment she perceived the Lass of Devon bearing
down upon her consort, crowded on more sail, and was now ranging up on
the other side of her. Bidding Jacob press the enemy hard with half his
force, Harry, with the remainder, leaped back on to the deck of his own
ship, just as the enemy boarded from the other side. The fight was now a
desperate one. The vessel which had last arrived bore a hundred of the
troops of the garrison, and the numbers were thus nearly equal. The
Royalists, however, fought with a greater desperation, for they knew the
fate that awaited them if conquered. Gradually they cleared the deck of
the Lass of Devon of the enemy, and in turn boarded their opponent.
William Long led thirty men into the tops of the Lass of Devon, and
poured their fire into the crowded enemy. Every step of the deck was
fiercely contested, but at last the Roundheads gave way. Some threw down
their arms and called for quarter, others ran below. The Royalists, with
shouts of "Remember Drogheda!" fell upon them, and many of those who
had surrendered were cut down before Harry could arrest the slaughter.

A loud cheer announced the victory, and the men in the other ship, who
had hitherto, although with difficulty, made front against the attacks
of Jacob and his men, now lost heart and ran below. The wind had by this
time entirely dropped, but battening the prisoners below, Harry set his
men to thrust the ships past one another, until they were sufficiently
in line for their guns to be brought to bear upon the third enemy.
Crippled as she was by the loss of her mast, she immediately hauled down
her colors, and the victory was complete.

The prisoners were brought on deck and disarmed. Harry found that the
boats of the four ships would carry two hundred men closely packed, and
but a hundred and eighty of the two hundred and fifty troops who had
sailed in pursuit remained alive. These, with sufficient provisions and
water to last for three days, were made to take their places in the
boats, and told to row back to the island, which they should be able to
regain in two days at the utmost. The crews of the captured ships were
willing enough to obey the orders of their captors, for the sailors had
in general but little sympathy with the doings of Parliament. Harry had
lost in killed and wounded forty-two men, and the rest he divided
between the four ships, giving about thirty-five men to each. He
himself, with Jacob, William Long, and Mike, remained on board the Lass
of Devon, officers being placed in command of the troops on board the
other ships, which were ordered to sail in company with her. Twenty-four
hours were spent in getting a jury-mast set in place of that which had
been shot away. When this was completed the four ships hoisted their
canvas and sailed together for Holland.

They met with no adventure until near the mouth of the English Channel,
when one morning a fleet of eight ships was perceived. The captain of
the Lass of Devon at once pronounced them to be ships of war, and their
rate of sailing speedily convinced Harry that there was no chance of
escape. Against such odds resistance was useless, and the other ships
were signaled to lower their topsails in answer to the gun which the
leading ship of the squadron fired. Anticipating a return to captivity,
if not instant death, all on board watched the approaching men-of-war.
Presently these, when close at hand, brought up into the wind, and a
boat was lowered. It rowed rapidly to the Lass of Devon, which lay
somewhat the nearest to them. Harry stood on the quarter-deck ready to
surrender his sword. The boat came alongside, an officer leaped on deck
and advanced toward him.

Harry could scarce believe his eyes; this gallant, in the gay dress of a
cavalier officer, could be no follower of Cromwell. The officer paused
and gazed in astonishment at Harry. The recognition was mutual, and the
words "Furness" and "Elphinstone" broke from their lips.

"Why, Elphinstone, what squadron is that?"

"Prince Rupert's, to be sure," the officer said.

"What! did you take us for the Roundhead fleet?"

Harry made no reply, but taking off his hat, shouted to his men, "It is
the Royalist fleet. Three cheers for Prince Rupert."

A cheer of joy burst from the men, caught up and re-echoed by the crews
of the other ships. Harry led the officer into his cabin, and rapidly
explained to him the circumstances which had taken place; ten minutes
later, entering a boat, he rowed off to the flagship.

"Why! Harry Furness!" exclaimed Prince Rupert, "whither do you spring
from? I heard of you last as being sent to slave in the Bermudas, and
methought, old friend, that you would stand the heat better than most,
since you had served such a sharp apprenticeship with me in that oven
you wot of. And now tell me how is it that you have got free, and that I
find you sailing here with four ships?"

Harry related his adventure. When he had finished Prince Rupert said:

"I envy you, Furness, in that you have three faithful friends. One is as
much as most men could even hope for, whereas you have three, who each
seem willing to go through fire and water for you. They do remind me of
the wonderful servants of whom my old nurse used to tell me as a child.
They were given by a fairy to some fortunate prince, and whenever he got
into sore straits were ready to do the most impossible things to free
him from them. Now you must take up your quarters here until we reach
Holland, whither I am on the point of sailing. We have picked up several
fat prizes, which I have sent to Italy to sell, to pay the wages of my
men, for his gracious majesty's exchequer is of the emptiest. But I hear
that Blake is about to put to sea with the ships of the Parliament, and
I care not to risk my fleet, for they will be needed to escort his
majesty to Scotland ere long."

"Are the Scots then again inclined to his majesty's cause? Were I King
Charles, I would not trust myself to them," Harry said. "They sold his
father, and would sell him--at least Argyll and the knaves with him
would do so."

"I like not these cold, calculating men of the north, myself," Prince
Rupert said, "and trust them as little. Nor would my cousin venture
himself again among them, if he took my advice. His majesty, however, is
no more given to the taking of advice than was his father before him,
unless it be of Buckingham and Wilmot, and other dissolute young lords,
whose counsel and company are alike evil for him."

The same afternoon the fleet sailed for Holland, the four merchantmen
accompanying it. Upon their arrival there Harry sold the three ships
which he had taken, together with such cargo as was found in their
holds. He sold also the cargo of the Lass of Devon, leaving the ship
itself, as he had promised, to the captain, its owner, and making him
and the sailors a handsome present for the way they stood by him and
worked the ship during the action. The rest of the proceeds he divided
between the officers and men who had sailed with him, and finding that
these were ready still to share his fortunes, he formed them into a
regiment for the service of the king, enlisting another hundred
Royalists, whom he found there well-nigh starving, in his ranks.

It was at the end of April, 1650, that Harry reached Hamburg, and a
month later came the news of the defeat and death of the Earl of
Montrose. He had two months before sailed from Hamburg to the Orkneys,
where he had landed with a thousand men. Crossing to the mainland he had
marched down into Sunderland. There he had met a body of cavalry under
Colonel Strachan, in a pass in the parish of Kincardine, now called
Craigchonichan, or the Rock of Lamentation. The recruits he had raised
in Orkney and the north fled at once. The Scotch and Germans he had
brought with him fought bravely, but without effect, and were utterly
defeated, scattering in all directions. Montrose wandered for many days
in disguise, but was at last captured, and was brought to Edinburgh with
every indignity. He was condemned to death by the Covenanters, and
executed. So nobly did he bear himself at his death that the very
indignities with which Argyll and his minions loaded him, in order to
make him an object of derision to the people, failed in their object,
and even those who hated him most were yet struck with pity and
admiration at his noble aspect and bearing. Argyll stood at a balcony to
see him pass, and Montrose foretold a similar fate for this double-dyed
traitor, a prediction which was afterward fulfilled. Harry deeply
regretted the loss of this gallant and chivalrous gentleman.




 

WITH THE SCOTCH ARMY.


While trying and executing Montrose for loyalty to the king, the Scots
were themselves negotiating with Charles, commissioners having come over
to Breda, where he was living, for the purpose. They insisted upon his
swearing to be faithful to the Covenant, to his submitting himself to
the advice of the Parliament and Church, and to his promising never to
permit the exercise of the Catholic religion in any part of his
dominions. Charles agreed to everything demanded of him, having all the
time no intention whatever of keeping his promises. While he was
swearing to observe everything the Scots asked of him, he was writing to
Ormonde to tell him that he was to mind nothing he heard as to his
agreement with the Scots, for that he would do all the Irish required.
Charles, indeed, although but a young man of twenty, was as full of
duplicity and faithlessness as his father, without possessing any of the
virtues of that unfortunate king, and the older and wiser men among his
followers were alienated by his dissolute conduct, and by the manner in
which he gave himself up to the reckless counsels of men like Buckingham
and Wilmot.

Harry heard with deep regret the many stories current of the evil life
and ways of the young king. Had it not been for the deadly hatred which
he felt to Cromwell and the Puritans for the murder of Sir Arthur
Ashton, and the rest of the garrison and people of Drogheda, in cold
blood, he would have retired altogether from the strife, and would have
entered one of the continental armies, in which many Royalist refugees
had already taken service. He determined, however, that he would join in
this one expedition, and that if it failed he would take no further part
in civil wars in England, but wait for the time, however distant, when,
as he doubted not, the people of England would tire of the hard rule of
the men of the army and conventicle, and would, with open arms, welcome
the return of their sovereign.

Early in June the king sailed for Scotland, accompanied by the regiment
which Harry had raised, and a few hundred other troops. He landed there
on the 16th. The English Parliament at once appointed Cromwell
captain-general and commander-in-chief of all the forces raised and to
be raised within the commonwealth of England. A few days later he left
London, and on the 23d of June entered Scotland with sixteen thousand
men. King Charles, to whom Harry had been presented by Prince Rupert as
one of his father's most gallant and faithful soldiers, received him at
first with great cordiality. As soon as he found, however, that this
young colonel was in no way inclined to join in his dissipations, that
his face was stern and set when light talk or sneers against religion
were uttered by the king's companions, Charles grew cold to him, and
Harry was glad to be relieved from all personal attendance upon him, and
to devote himself solely to his military duties. Upon landing in
Scotland, Harry, with his regiment, was encamped in the valley between
Edinburgh Castle and the high hill called Arthur's Seat. A few days
after his arrival he, with Jacob, who was now raised to the rank of
major, and William Long, who was one of his lieutenants, entered the
palace of Holyrood, where the king's court was held. Here were gathered
a motley assembly. A few English Cavaliers, many loyal Scotch nobles and
gentlemen, and a large number of somber men of the Covenant. Next to
Charles stood a tall man, whom Harry instantly recognized. Argyll, for
it was he, stared fixedly at the young colonel, who returned his look
with one as cold and haughty.

"This is Colonel Furness, my lord earl," the young king said. "One of my
father's bravest and most devoted followers."

"I seem to have met the gentleman before," the earl said.

"You have," Harry replied coldly. "At that time the Earl of Argyll
threatened to torture me into betraying the secrets of his majesty, and
would, I doubt not, have carried his threat into effect had I not
escaped from his hands. The times have changed, and the Earl of Argyll
now stands beside his king, but I, sir, have not forgotten the past so
easily." So saying, with a deep bow to the king, Harry passed on.

"Harry," whispered Donald Leslie, a young Scotch officer who had joined
the ranks of his regiment as captain at Hamburg, "hitherto I have
thought you the wisest and most discreet of men. I cannot say as much
now. It would have been safer to walk into a den of lions than to insult
the old red fox. He was never known to forgive, and those who offend him
have a short life. Beware, colonel, for henceforth you carry your life
in your hand."

"My sword is as sharp as his," Harry laughed, as they issued into the
open air.

"I doubt it not," Leslie said, "but it is with daggers rather than
swords that Argyll fights, and with secret plottings more than either.
Edinburgh swarms with Campbells, any one of whom would think no more of
running you through at his lord's command than he would of killing a
rat. Mark my words, before a week is out you will be engaged in some
broil or other."

Jacob and William Long heard with great disquietude the remarks of the
young Scotch officer, which they knew sufficient of Argyll to be aware
were perfectly true. They resolved that they would maintain a careful
watch over their friend, and that night they charged Mike, who was now a
tall, active young fellow of seventeen, to keep the strictest watch as
he followed his master in the streets, and to have pistol and sword
always in readiness.

Two days later Harry had the first evidence of the truth of Leslie's
prediction. He was walking up the High Street, accompanied by Jacob,
while Leslie and two or three of his officers followed a short distance
behind, when three or four Scotch nobles were seen approaching. One of
these, Colonel Campbell, of Arrain, a tall and powerful figure, in
passing jostled roughly against Harry.

"S'death, sir!" he exclaimed. "Do you think that you are in England,
that you can take up the whole of the road?"

"I'm as much entitled to the road as yourself," Harry said hotly; "you
purposely jostled me."

"Well, sir, and what if I did?" Colonel Campbell replied. "If you don't
like it you have your remedy," and he touched his sword significantly.

"I will meet you, sir," Harry said, "in an hour's time at the foot of
the Castlehill."

The colonel nodded, and accompanied by his kinsmen strode on.

"Jacob, you and Leslie will act with me?" Harry asked.

"Willingly enough," Leslie replied. "But it is a bad business. Campbell
has the name of being one of the best swordsmen in the Scottish army.
Of course he has been set on to attack you."

"I have been fighting," Harry said, "for the last ten years, and was not
a bad swordsman when I began. Unless I mistake, I am as powerful a man
as Colonel Campbell, and I fear not him or any man."

At the time appointed Harry, accompanied by his seconds, was upon the
ground, where five minutes later they were joined by Colonel Campbell,
with two of his kinsmen. While the principals divested themselves of
their cloaks and doublets, the seconds compared their swords. They were
of entirely different fashion, Harry's being long and straight with
sharp edges, while Colonel Campbell's was a basket-hilted sword, also
straight and double edged, and even larger and much heavier than
Harry's; each had brought one of similar make and size to his own. Some
conversation took place as to the weapons which should be used.

"I cannot fight with a plaything like that," Colonel Campbell said
roughly.

"And I object equally," Harry puts in calmly, "to wield a heavier weapon
than that to which I am accustomed. But I am quite content to fight with
my own against that of Colonel Campbell."

The seconds at first on both sides objected to this, arguing that the
weight and length of Campbell's weapon would give him an unfair
advantage. Harry, however, was firm.

"A man fights better," he said, "with the sword to which he is used.
Mine is of tried temper, and I have no fear of its breaking." Harry had
good reason for faith in his weapon. It was a long, straight blade of
Toledo steel, which he had purchased for a considerable sum from a
Spanish Jew in Hamburg. Colonel Campbell put an end to the argument by
roughly saying that he wanted no more talk, and that if Colonel Furness
meant fighting he had better take up his ground. This had already been
marked out, and Harry immediately stood on the defensive.

In a moment the swords met. Colonel Campbell at once attacked furiously,
trying to beat down Harry's guard by sheer strength and the weight of
his weapon. The Englishman, however, was to the full as powerful a man,
and his muscles from long usage were like cords of steel. His blade met
the sweeping blows of the Scotchman firmly and steadily, while his point
over and over again menaced the breast of his adversary, who several
times only saved himself by springing back beyond it. Harry's seconds
saw from the first that the issue was not doubtful. In a contest between
the edge and the point, the latter always wins if strength and skill be
equal, and in this case, while in point of strength the combatants were
fairly matched, Harry was more skilled in the use of his weapon, whose
lightness, combined with its strength, added to his advantage. The fight
lasted but five minutes. Twice Harry's sword drew blood, and at the
third thrust he ran his adversary through under the shoulder. The latter
dropped his sword, with a curse.

"I have spared your life, Colonel Campbell," Harry said. "It was at my
mercy a dozen times, but I wished not to kill you. You forced this
quarrel upon me at the bidding of another, and against you I had no
animosity. Farewell, sir. I trust that ere the day of battle you will be
able to use your sword again in the service of the king."

So saying, Harry resumed his doublet and cloak, and, accompanied by his
seconds, returned to his camp, leaving Campbell, furious with pain and
disappointment, to be conveyed home by his friends.

"So far, so good, Harry," Captain Leslie said. "The attempt will, you
will find, be a more serious one. Argyll will not try fair means again.
But beware how you go out at night."

The duel made a good deal of talk, and Argyll attempted to induce the
king to take the matter up, and to punish Harry for his share in it. But
the young king, although obliged to listen every day to the long sermons
and admonitions of the Covenanters, was heartily sick of them already
and answered Argyll lightly that, so far as he had heard of the
circumstances, Colonel Campbell was wholly to blame. "And, indeed,"
added the king, "from what I have heard, the conduct of your kinsman was
so wantonly insulting that men say he must have been provoked thereto by
others, as the two officers appear to have been strangers until the
moment when their quarrel arose."

The earl grew paler than usual, and pressed his thin lips tightly
together.

"I know of no reason," he said, "why Colonel Campbell should have
engaged wantonly in a quarrel with this English officer."

"No!" Charles said innocently. "And if you do not, my lord, I know of no
one that does. Colonel Furness is an officer who is somewhat staid and
severe for his years, and who, in sooth, stands somewhat aloof from me,
and cares not for the merry jests of Buckingham; but he is a gallant
soldier. He has risked his life over and over again in the cause of my
sainted father, and tried his utmost to save him, both at Carisbrook and
Whitehall. Any one who plots against him is no friend of mine." The
young king spoke with a dignity and sternness which were not common to
him, and Argyll, biting his lips, felt a deadlier enmity than ever
toward the man who had brought this reproof upon his shoulders.

The following day Harry received orders from General Leslie, who
commanded the royal forces, to march down toward the border, accompanied
by two regiments of horse. He was to devastate the country and to fall
back gradually before Cromwell's advance, the cavalry harassing him
closely, but avoiding any serious conflict with the Roundhead horse. The
whole party were under the command of Colonel Macleod.

"I am heartily glad to be on the move, Jacob," Harry said, on the
evening before starting. "It is not pleasant to know that one is in
constant danger of being attacked whenever one goes abroad. Once away
from Edinburgh one may hope to be beyond the power of Argyll."

"I would not be too sure of that," Donald Leslie said. "A hound on the
track of a deer is not more sure or untiring than is Argyll when he
hunts down a foe. Be warned by me, and never relax a precaution so long
as you are on Scottish ground. There are men who whisper that even now,
when he stands by the side of the king, Argyll is in communication with
Cromwell. Trust me, if he can do you an ill turn, he will."

Upon the following morning the detachment marched, with flags flying and
drums beating, and the king himself rode down to see them depart. Argyll
was with him, and the king, as if in bravado of the formidable earl,
waved his hand to Harry, and said: "Good-by, my grave colonel. Take care
of yourself, and do not spare my enemies as you spared my friend."

Harry doffed his plumed hat, and rode on at the head of his regiment.
The force marched rapidly, for it was known that Cromwell was within a
few days of Berwick. So fast did they travel that in three days they
were near the border. Then they began the work which they had been
ordered to carry out. Every head of cattle was driven up the country,
and the inhabitants were ordered to load as much of their stores of
grain in wagons as these would hold, and to destroy the rest. The force
under Colonel Macleod saw that these orders were carried out, and when,
on the 14th of July, Cromwell crossed the Tweed, he found the whole
country bare of all provision for his troops. In vain his cavalry made
forays to a distance from the coast. Harry's foot opposed them at every
defensible point, while the cavalry hung upon their skirts. In vain the
Roundheads tried to charge by them. The Scotch cavalry, in obedience to
orders, avoided a contest, and day after day Cromwell's troopers had to
return empty handed, losing many of their men by the fire of Harry's
infantry. Thus the army of Cromwell was obliged to advance slowly upon
the line of coast, drawing their supplies wholly from the fleet which
accompanied it.

One evening Colonel Macleod rode up to the cottage where Harry was
quartered for the night.

"I am going to beat up Oliver's camp to-night," he said. "Do you cover
the retreat with your men at the ford of the river. If I can get for
five minutes in his camp I will read the Roundheads a lesson, and maybe
spike some of his cannon. If I could catch Cromwell himself it would be
as good as a great victory."

After nightfall the force approached the enemy's camp; at the ford the
infantry halted, the cavalry crossing and continuing their way to the
camp, about a mile distant. An hour passed without any sound being
heard. At length a sound of distant shouts, mingled with the reports of
firearms, fell upon the ear.

"Macleod is among them now," Donald Leslie exclaimed. "I would I wore
with him."

"You will have your turn presently," Harry replied. "A thousand horse
may do a good deal of damage in a sudden attack, but they must fall back
as soon as the Roundheads rally."

For five or six minutes the distant tumult continued. Then it ceased
almost as suddenly as it had begun. A minute or two later there was a
deep, muffled sound.

"Here come the horse," Jacob said.

The infantry had already been placed along the bank of the river on each
side of the ford, leaving the way clear in the center for the passage of
the cavalry. It was not long before they arrived on the opposite bank,
and dashed at full speed across the river. Colonel Macleod rode at their
rear.

"The Ironsides are just behind," he said to Harry. "Let your men shoot
sharp and straight as they try to cross. We will charge them as they
reach the bank."

A minute later, and the close files of the Roundhead cavalry could be
seen approaching, the moonlight glinting on steel cap, breastpiece, and
sword.

"Steady, lads!" Harry shouted. "Do not fire a shot till they enter the
river. Then keep up a steady fire on the head of the column."

The Roundheads halted when they reached the river, and formed rapidly
into a column, twelve abreast, for the ford was no wider. As they
entered the stream a heavy musketry fire opened suddenly upon them. Men
and horses went down, floating away in the river. In spite of their
losses the cavalry pressed on, and though numbers fell, gained the
opposite bank. Then arose the Royalist cry "King and Covenant!" and the
Scottish horse swept down. The head of the column was shattered by the
charge, but the Ironsides still pressed on, and breaking the center of
the Scottish horse, poured across the river.

Harry had already given his orders to Jacob, who commanded the left wing
of the infantry, and the regiment, drawing up on both flanks of the
column of Ironsides, poured so heavy a fire upon them, while the cavalry
of Macleod again charged them in front, that the column was broken, and
still fighting sturdily, fell back again across the river. The moment
they did so a heavy fire of musketry opened from the further bank.

"Their infantry are up, Colonel Furness," Macleod said. "Draw off your
men in good order. I will cover the retreat. We have done enough for
to-night."

Getting his regiment together, Harry ordered them to retire at the
double, keeping their formation as they went. The Roundhead cavalry
again crossed the river, and several times charged the Scotch horse.
Twice they succeeded in breaking through, but Harry, facing his men
round, received them pike in hand, the musketeers in rear keeping up so
hot a fire over the shoulders of the pikemen that the Ironsides drew
rein before reaching them, and presently fell back, leaving the party to
retire without further pursuit.

"I as nearly as possible caught Cromwell," Colonel Macleod said, riding
up to Harry. "We got confused among the tents and ropes, or should have
had him. We entered his tent, but the bird had flown. We cut down some
scores of his infantry, and spiked four guns, I have not lost twenty
men, and his cavalry must have lost at least a hundred from your fire,
besides the damage I did at their camp."

Obtaining a stock of supplies sufficient for some days from the ships at
Dunbar, Cromwell advanced to Musselburgh, within striking distance of
Edinburgh. Leslie had strongly posted his army in intrenched lines
extending from Edinburgh to Leith, a distance of two miles. Colonel
Macleod with his detachment rejoined the army on the same day that
Cromwell reached Musselburgh. Upon the day after the arrival of the
English there was a sharp cavalry fight, and Cromwell would fain have
tempted the Scotch army to engage beyond their lines. But Leslie was
not to be drawn. He knew that if he could maintain himself in his
intrenchments the English must fall back, as they had the sea behind
them and on their right, Edinburgh in front of them, and a devastated
country on their left. At the urgent request of Cromwell the Parliament
strained every nerve to send up provisions by ships, and so enabled him
to remain before Edinburgh for a month.

A few days after his arrival Harry received orders to take a hundred and
fifty men of his regiment, and to post himself at Kirkglen, which
blocked a road by which it was thought Cromwell might send foraging
parties westward. Harry asked that a detachment of cavalry might
accompany him, but the request was refused. Kirkglen stood fifteen miles
south of Edinburgh, and somewhat to its west. Harry left Jacob to
command the main body of the regiment, and took with him the companies
of Donald Leslie and Hugh Grahame, in the latter of which William Long
was lieutenant. They sallied out from the western side of the camp at
daybreak.

"I like not this expedition, Colonel Furness," Donald Leslie said. "The
refusal to send cavalry with us is strange. Methinks I see the finger of
that crafty fox Argyll in the pie. His faithfulness to the cause is more
and more doubted, though none dare wag a tongue against him, and if it
be true that he is in communication with Cromwell, we shall have the
Roundheads, horse and foot, down upon us."

"There is a castle there, is there not," Harry asked, "which we might
occupy?"

"Assuredly there is," Leslie replied. "It is the hold of Alan Campbell,
a cousin of the man you pinked. It is that which adds to my suspicion.
You will see, unless I am greatly mistaken, that he will not admit us."

Such, indeed, proved to be the case. Upon their arrival at Kirkglen,
Leslie went in Harry's name to demand admittance to the castle for the
royal troops, but Campbell replied that he had received no orders to
that effect, and that it would greatly incommode him to quarter so large
a number of men there. He said, however, that he would willingly
entertain Colonel Furness and his officers. Leslie brought back the
message, strongly urging Harry on no account to enter the castle and put
himself in the hands of the Campbells. Harry said that even had he no
cause to doubt the welcome he might receive at the castle, he should in
no case separate himself from his men, when he might be at any moment
attacked.

"It is a rough piece of country between this and Cromwell's post,"
Leslie said, "and he would have difficulty in finding his way hither.
There is more than one broad morass to be crossed, and without a guide
he would scarce attempt it. It is for this reason that he is so unlikely
to send out foraging parties in this direction. It was this reflection
which caused me to wonder why we should be ordered hither."

"Mike," Harry said, "you have heard what Captain Leslie says. Do you
keep watch to-night near the castle gate, and let me know whether any
leave it; and in which direction they go. I will place a man behind to
watch the postern. If treachery is meditated, Campbell will send news of
our coming to Cromwell."




 

THE PATH ACROSS THE MORASS.


Mike, when night fell, moved away toward the castle, which lay about a
quarter of a mile from the village. Approaching to within fifty yards of
the gate, he sat down to watch. About eleven o'clock he heard the creak
of the gate, and presently was startled by seeing two horsemen ride past
him. "They must have muffled their horses' feet," he said to himself.
"They are up to no good. I wish there had only been one of them." Mike
slipped off his shoes and started in pursuit, keeping just far enough
behind the horsemen to enable him to observe the outline of their
figures. For half a mile they proceeded quietly. Then they stopped,
dismounted, removed the cloths from their horses' feet, and remounting
rode forward at a gallop. Mike's old exercise as a runner now rendered
him good service. He could already tell, by the direction which the
horsemen were taking, that they were bearing to the east of Edinburgh,
but he resolved to follow as far as possible in order to see exactly
whither they went. The road, or rather track, lay across a moorland
country. The ground was often deep and quaggy, and the horsemen several
times checked their speed, and went at a slow walk, one advancing on
foot along the track to guide the way. These halts allowed breathing
time for Mike, who found it hard work to keep near them when going at
full speed. At last, after riding for an hour, the horsemen halted at a
solitary house on the moorland, Here several horses, held by troopers,
were standing. Mike crept round to the back of the house, and looked in
at the window. He saw two English officers sitting by a fire, while a
light burned on a table. Mike at once recognized in one of them the
dreaded General Cromwell, whom he had seen at Drogheda.

"What a fool I was," he muttered to himself, "to have come without my
pistol. I would have shot him as he sits, and so wiped out Drogheda."

At the moment the door opened, and a trooper in Scotch uniform entered.
"I have brought this letter," he said, "from Alan Campbell."

The general took the letter and opened it. "Campbell promises," he said
to the other officer, "to open fire upon the detachment in the village
with the guns of the castle as soon as we attack. One of the men who has
brought this will remain here and guide our troops across the morass. He
suggests that two hundred foot and as many horse should be here at eight
to-morrow evening. All he stipulates for is that Colonel Furness, the
Royalist who commands the enemy's detachment, shall be given over to
him, he having, it seems, some enmity with Argyll. Furness? ah, that is
the officer whom I sent to the Bermudas from Drogheda. We had advices of
his having got away and captured a ship with other prisoners on board. A
bold fellow, and a good officer, but all the more dangerous. Let
Campbell do with him as he likes."

The other officer drew out an inkhorn and wrote, at Cromwell's
dictation, his adherence to the terms offered by Alan Campbell. Cromwell
signed the paper, and handed it to the messenger. Then the English
general and his escort mounted and rode off. Campbell's retainers sat
for half an hour drinking together. Then they came to the door. One
mounted, and saying to the other, "I would rather have twenty-four
hours' sleep such as you have before you, than have to ride back to
Kirkglen to-night; the mist is setting in thickly," rode off into the
darkness.

Mike kept close to him, until at last the man dismounted to follow the
track where the morass was most dangerous. In an instant Mike sprang
upon him and buried his dagger in his body. Without a cry the trooper
fell. Mike felt in his doublet for Cromwell's letter. Placing this in
his breast, he went a few paces from the path where he found that he
sunk to his knees, the water being some inches deep over the bog. Then
he returned, lifted the body of the trooper, carried it as far into the
bog as he dared venture, and then dropped it. He placed his foot on the
iron breastpiece, and pressed until the body sank in the soft ooze, and
the water completely covered it. Then he went back to the horse, and
taking the reins, followed the track until completely clear of the
moorland country, where, mounting, he rode back to Kirkglen, and
presented himself to Harry. The latter had, hours before, gone to bed,
having posted strong guards around the village. He struck a light and
listened to Mike's relation of what he had done, and ended by the
production of the document with Cromwell's signature.

"Another debt to the Earl of Argyll," Harry said grimly. "However,
although this proves the treachery of his kinsman, it does not convict
Argyll himself, although the evidence is strong enough to hang any other
man. Now, Leslie, what do you advise? Shall we send and seize the man
left at the hut?"

"It is a doubtful question," Leslie answered, after a pause. "When
Campbell finds that his messenger does not return before morning, he
will like enough send others off to learn the reason why. If they find
him gone, Campbell may suspect that his plan has failed and may send
warning to Cromwell."

"At any rate," Harry continued, "we need not decide before morning. But
at daybreak, Leslie, plant a party of men on the road and stop any
horseman riding out. Let the sergeant in charge say only that he has my
orders that none are to pass eastward. It would be a natural precaution
to take, and when the news comes back to the castle, Campbell will not
necessarily know that his scheme has been detected."

The next morning Leslie volunteered to go out with a couple of men and
capture the guide, and arraying himself in his clothes, to take his
place, and lead the Roundhead troops astray.

"Were the country other than it is," Harry said, "I would accept your
offer, my brave Leslie, even though it might entail your death, for it
would be difficult for you to slip away. But over such ground there is
no need of this. Let the guide lead the Roundhead troops along the path.
We will reconnoiter the morass to-day, and when night falls will so post
our men as to open a fire on either flank of him as he comes across the
track. Not more than four footmen can march abreast, according to what
Mike says, and we shall surprise him, instead of he surprising us."

An hour later two horsemen rode out from the castle, but upon reaching
the guard Leslie had placed were turned back. They returned to the
castle, and a short time afterward a trooper rode down into the village
with a note from Alan Campbell, demanding haughtily by what warrant
Colonel Furness ventured to interfere with the free passage of his
retainers. Harry replied that he had, as a military precaution,
stationed guards on the various roads leading toward the enemy's
quarter, and that they were ordered to turn back all, whomsoever they
might be, who might seek to pass.

Alan Campbell returned a furious answer, that he should sally out with
his garrison, and ride where he listed. Harry replied by marching fifty
men up to the road leading to the castle, and by sending a message to
Alan Campbell that, although he should regret to be obliged to treat him
as an enemy, yet that assuredly if he strove by force to break the
military rules he had laid down, he should be compelled to fire upon
him. Leaving the detachment under charge of Lieutenant Long, and the
main body in the village under that of Hugh Grahame, Harry, accompanied
by Donald Leslie and Mike, rode off to reconnoiter the morass. They
found that it was particularly bad at two points, while between these
the ground was firm for a distance of twenty yards on each side of the
track. Beyond the swamp was very deep for thirty or forty yards on both
sides, and then it was again somewhat firmer.

Harry decided to post twenty-five men behind these quagmires. Their
orders would be to remain perfectly quiet until the column, passing the
first morass, should have entered the second; then, when Harry, with the
main body, opened fire upon them there, they were to commence upon the
flanks of the column.

Returning to the camp, Harry sent forty men with shovels, obtained in
the village, to dig a trench, twelve feet wide, and as deep as they
could get for the water, across the track, at the near side of the
morass.

At nightfall, leaving twenty-five men under William Long in front of the
castle, with orders to let none issue forth, and to shoot down any who
might make the attempt, Harry marched out with the rest of his command.
Crossing the ditch which had been dug, he led fifty forward, and posted
them, as he had planned with Leslie; with twenty-five, he took up his
own station behind the breastwork formed by the earth thrown out from
the trench. The remaining fifty he bade advance as far as they safely
could into the swamp on either side. Two hours later a dull sound was
heard, the occasional clink of arms, and the muffled tread of many feet
on the soft ground. The Roundhead infantry, two hundred strong, led the
way, followed by their horse, the guide walking with the officer at the
head of the column. When it approached within twenty yards of the ditch
Harry gave the word, and a flash of fire streamed from the top of the
earthwork. At the same moment those on either side opened fire into the
flanks of the column, while the fifty men beyond poured their fire into
the cavalry in the rear of the column.

For a moment all was confusion. The Roundheads had anticipated no
attack, and were taken wholly by surprise. The guide had fallen at the
first discharge and all were ignorant of the ground on which they found
themselves. They were, however, trained to conflict. Those on the flank
of the column endeavored to penetrate the morass, but they immediately
sank to the middle, and had much ado to regain the solid track. The head
of the column, pouring a volley into their invisible foes, leveled their
pikes, and rushed to the assault. A few steps, and they fell into a deep
hole, breast high with water, and on whose slippery bottom their feet
could scarce find standing. In vain they struggled forward. From front
and flank the fire of their enemy smote them. Those who reached the
opposite side of the trench were run through with pikes as they strove
to climb from it.

For ten minutes the desperate struggle continued, and then, finding the
impossibility of storming such a position in the face of foes of whose
strength they were ignorant, the Roundhead infantry turned, and in good
order marched back, leaving half their number dead behind them. The
cavalry in the rear had fared but little better. Finding the ground on
either side was firm when the fire opened on their flanks, they faced
both ways, and charged. But ere the horses had gone twenty strides they
were struggling to their girths in the morass. Their foes kept up a
steady fire, at forty yards' distance, into the struggling mass, and
before they could extricate themselves and regain the pathway, many
leaving their horses behind, a third of their number had fallen. Joined
by the beaten infantry, they retired across the track, and made their
way back toward their camp.

Leaving a strong guard at the morass to resist further attempts, Harry
returned with his force to the village having inflicted a loss of a
hundred and fifty upon enemy, while he himself had lost but eight men.
He intrenched the position strongly, and remained there unmolested,
until a week later he received orders to march back to Edinburgh. The
following day he was summoned before King Charles. He found there
General Leslie, the Earl of Argyll, Alan Campbell, and several of the
leaders of the Covenant.

"What is this I hear of you, Colonel Furness?" the king said. "General
Leslie has reported to me that you have inflicted a very heavy defeat
upon a rebel force which marched to surprise you. This is good service,
and for it I render you my hearty thanks. But, sir, the Earl of Argyll
complains to me that you have beleaguered his kinsman, Alan Campbell, in
his hold at Kirkglen, and treated him as a prisoner, suffering none to
go out or in during your stay there."

"This, sire, is the warranty for my conduct," Harry said, producing the
document signed by Cromwell. "This was taken by one of my men from a
trooper who had borne a dispatch from Alan Campbell to the enemy. My
man watched the interview between him and Cromwell himself, heard the
terms of the dispatch, and saw Cromwell write and give this letter to
the trooper, whom he afterward slew, and brought me the letter. The
other trooper, who acted as guide to the enemy, fell in the attack."

The king took the letter and read it. "My lord," he said, "this is a
matter which gravely touches your honor. This is a letter of General
Cromwell's in answer to a traitorous communication of your kinsman here.
He has offered to betray Colonel Furness and the troops under him to
Cromwell, and has sent a guide for the English troops. He stipulates
only that Colonel Furness shall be handed over to him to do as he likes
with. As it was manifest to me here some time since that you and Colonel
Furness are not friends, this touches you nearly."

"I know nothing of it," the earl said. "My kinsman will tell you."

"I do not need his assurances," King Charles said coldly. "He, at least,
is proved to be a traitor, and methinks, my lord earl, that the
preachers who are so fond of holding forth to me upon the wickedness of
my ways might with advantage bestow some of their spare time
in conversing with you upon the beauty and godliness of
straightforwardness. General Leslie, you will arrest at once, on his
leaving our presence, Colonel Alan Campbell, and will cause a court of
inquiry to sift this matter to the bottom. And hark you, my lord of
Argyll, see you that no more of your kinsmen practice upon the life of
my faithful Colonel Furness. This is the third time that he has been in
jeopardy at your hands. I am easy, my lord earl, too easy, mayhap, but
let no man presume too far upon it. My power is but limited here, but
remember the old saying, 'Wise men do not pull the tails of lions'
whelps.' The day may come when Charles II. will be a king in power as
well as in name. Beware that you presume not too far upon his endurance
now." So saying, the king turned from Argyll, and bidding Harry follow
him, and tell him the story of the defeat of the English troops, left
the earl standing alone, the picture of rage and mortification.

"You had best beware, Master Furness," the king said. "He needs a long
spoon they say, who sups with the deil. The Earl of Argyll is the real
king of Scotland at present, and it is ill quarreling with him. You have
got the best of it in the first three rubbers, but be sure that Argyll
will play on till the cards favor him. And if you are once in his power,
I would not give a baubee for your life. The proud earl treats me as a
master would teach a froward pupil, but I tell you, Master Furness, and
I know you are discreet and can be trusted, that as surely as the earl
brought Montrose to the block, so surely shall Argyll's head roll on the
scaffold, if Charles II. is ever King of England. But I fear for you,
Master Furness. I can help you here not at all, and the lecture which,
on your behalf, I administered to the earl--and in faith I wonder now at
my own courage--will not increase his love for you. You will never be
safe as long as you remain in Scotland. What do you say? Will you south
and join one or other of the Royalist bodies who are in arms there?"

"Not so, your majesty. With your permission, I will play the game out to
the end, although I know that my adversary holds the strongest cards.
But even did I wish to leave, it would be as hazardous to do so as to
stay here. So long as I am with my regiment I am in safety. I could not
gain England by sea, for the Parliament ships bar the way, and did I
leave my regiment and go south with only a small party, my chance of
crossing the border alive would be but small. No, your majesty, I have
the honor to command a king's regiment, and whether against Cromwell in
the field, or against Argyll's plots and daggers, I shall do my duty to
the end."

When, upon his return to the camp, Harry told his friends the purport of
the interview between himself and Argyll, of Alan Campbell being put
under arrest and the earl openly reproved by the king, Donald Leslie
raised his hands in despair.

"If you get through this, Furness," he said, "I shall for the rest of my
life be convinced that you have a charmed existence, and that your good
genius is more powerful than the evil one of Argyll. The gossips say
that he is in alliance with the evil one himself, and I can well believe
them. But I beg you, in all seriousness, to confine yourself to the
camp. So long as you are here you are safe. But once beyond its limits
your life will not be worth a straw."

Jacob added his entreaties to those of Leslie, and Harry promised that
until the decisive battle was over he would keep among his men, unless
compelled by duty to appear at court.

Four days afterward a soldier entered Harry's tent, and handed him a
missive. It was as follows: "Upon receipt of this, Colonel Furness will
proceed to Leith and will board the vessel, the Royalist, which has just
arrived from Holland. There he will inspect the newly arrived recruits,
who will be attached to his regiment. He will examine the store of arms
brought by her, and will report on their state and condition.--David
Leslie, commanding his majesty's armies."

The duty was one of mere routine. Harry showed the note to Jacob, and
said, "You may as well come with me, Jacob. Your drilling is over for
the day, and you can aid me looking through the stores. Mike," he said,
"we shall be back to supper. We are only going down to the port." The
two officers buckled on their swords, and at once started on foot for
the port, which was but half a mile distant. Mike looked anxiously after
his master. Since the day when danger had first threatened him he had
scarce let him out of his sight, following close to his heels like a
faithful dog. His present business seemed assuredly to forbode no
danger. Nevertheless, the lad felt restless and anxious when he saw his
master depart. A few minutes later he went to William Long's tent.
"Master Long," he said, "will you see that my master's servant gets
supper in readiness at the usual hour. He has gone down to the port to
inspect some recruits just arrived from Holland, by order of General
Leslie, and said he would return by supper. I know that it is foolish,
but since the affair with Alan Campbell I am never easy when he is not
near. In this case, I do not see that there can possibly be any lurking
danger. Argyll could not know of his proceeding to the port, nor would
he venture to attack him there where the streets swarm with our
soldiers. Nevertheless, I would fain go down and assure myself that all
is well."

William Long at once promised to look after the supper, and Mike hurried
away after Harry and his companion. These had, however, too far a start
to be overtaken, and when he reached the wharf he saw a boat rowed by
two men, and having two sitters in the stern. It was already some
distance from shore, and appeared to be proceeding toward a vessel which
lay at anchor several hundred yards further out from the shore than the
others.

"Can you tell me," he asked a sailor, "whether that ship lying there is
the Royalist?"

"That is the name she goes by to-day," the sailor said, "for as I rowed
past her this morning on my way from fishing, I saw the name newly
painted on her stern. They have put it on her boat too, which you now
see rowing toward her, and which has been lying by the pier all day, in
readiness to take out any one who might wish to go off to her."

"But have they changed her name, then?" Mike asked. "What have they been
doing that for?"

"She has been called the Covenant for the last two years," the sailor
said. "But I suppose Johnny Campbell, her master, thought the other more
suited to the times."

The name of the captain at once aroused Mike's uneasiness to the
fullest.

"Tell me," he said, "good fellow, did that ship arrive this morning from
Holland?"

"From Holland!" repeated the sailor. "No. She came down the coast from
the north three days ago, with beasts for the army."

Mike stood for a moment thunderstruck. Then, without a word to the
sailor, he turned and ran back at full speed through the town up to the
camp. At a headlong pace he made his way through the camp until he
stopped at the tent of General Leslie. He was about to rush in without
ceremony when the sentinel stopped his way.

"Please let me pass," he panted. "I would see the general on a matter of
the utmost importance."

The sentries laughed.

"You don't suppose," one of them said, "that the general is to be
disturbed by every barefooted boy who wants to speak to him. If you have
aught to say, you must speak first to the lieutenant of the guard."

"Every moment is of importance," Mike urged. "It is a matter of life and
death. I tell you I must see the general." Then at the top of his voice
he began to shout, "Sir David Leslie! Sir David Leslie!"

"Silence there, young varmint, or I will wring thy neck for thee!"
exclaimed the soldier, greatly scandalized, seizing Mike and shaking him
violently. But the boy continued to shout out at the top of his voice,
"Sir David Leslie! Sir David Leslie!"




 

KIDNAPED.


Unable to silence Mike's shouts, the scandalized guards began dragging
him roughly from the spot, cuffing him as they went. But the door of the
tent opened, and General Leslie appeared.

"What means all this unseemly uproar?" he asked.

"This malapert boy, general, wished to force his way into your tent, and
when we stopped him, and told him that he must apply to the lieutenant
of the guard if he had aught of importance which he wished to
communicate to you, he began to shout like one possessed."

"Loose him," the general said. "Now, varlet, what mean you by this
uproar?"

"Forgive me, sir," Mike pleaded, "but I come on an errand which concerns
the life of my master, Colonel Furness."

"Come within," the general said briefly, for by this time a crowd had
gathered round the tent. "Now," he went on, "what is it you would tell
me?"

"I would ask you, sir, whether an hour since you sent an order to my
master that he should forthwith go on board the ship Royalist to inspect
recruits and stores of arms just arrived from Holland?"

The general looked at him in astonishment.

"I sent no such order," he said. "No ship has arrived from Holland of
that or any other name. What story is this that you have got hold of?"

"My master received such an order, sir, for I heard him read it aloud,
and he started at once with his major to carry out the order. Knowing,
sir, how great, as you are doubtless aware, is the enmity which the Earl
of Argyll bears to my master, I followed him to the port, and there
learned that the ship called the Royalist had not come from Holland, but
is a coaster from the north. I found, moreover, that she was but
yesterday named the Royalist, and that she was before known as the
Covenant, and that she is commanded by a Campbell. Then it seemed to me
that some plot had been laid to kidnap my master, and I ran straight to
you to ask you whether you had really ordered him to go on board this
ship."

"This must be seen to at once," the general said; for having been
present at the scene when Harry produced Cromwell's letter, he knew how
deadly was the hatred of the earl for the young colonel. "Without
there!" he cried. A soldier entered. "Send the lieutenant of the guard
here at once." The soldier disappeared, and the general sat down at his
table and hastily wrote an order. "Lieutenant," he said, when the
officer entered, "give this letter to Captain Farquharson, and tell him
to take his twenty men, and to go on the instant down to the port. There
he is to take boat and row out to the ship called the Royalist. He is to
arrest the captain and crew, and if he see not there Colonel Furness,
let him search the ship from top to bottom. If he find no signs of him,
let him bring the captain and six of his men ashore at once."

As soon as he heard the order given Mike, saluting the general, hurried
from the tent, and ran at full speed to the camp of Harry's regiment.
There he related to Donald Leslie and William Long the suspicious
circumstances which had occurred, and the steps which the general had
ordered to be taken.

"This is bad news, indeed," Captain Leslie exclaimed; "and I fear that
the colonel has fallen into the hands of Argyll's minions. If it be so
Farquharson is scarce likely to find the Royalist at anchor when he
arrives at the port. Come, Long, let us be stirring. I will hand over
the command of the regiment to Grahame till we return. While I am
speaking to him pick me out ten trusty men."

He hurried off, and in five minutes was hastening toward the port, with
William Long, Mike, and ten men. Such was the speed they made that they
reached the quay just at the same time with Captain Farquharson and his
men.

Mike gave a cry of despair. The Royalist had disappeared. He ran up to a
sailor who was still sitting on an upturned basket, smoking as he had
left him before.

"Where is the Royalist?" he exclaimed.

"Halloo! young fellow, are you back again? I thought you had gone off
with a bee in your bonnet, so suddenly and quickly did you run. The
Royalist? ay, she hoisted her sails two minutes after her boat reached
her. I was watching her closely, for I wondered whether she had aught to
do with your sudden flight. Methinks that something strange has happened
on board, for I saw what seemed to be a scuffle, and certainly the sun
shone on the gleam of swords. Then, too, instead of heaving her anchor,
she slipped the cable, and a Scotch captain must be in a hurry indeed
when he does that."

"Where is she now?" Mike asked.

"Over there, full four miles away, making across the Forth for the
northern point of land."

"Is she a fast ship?" Captain Leslie, who had come up, inquired.

"She has the name of being the fastest sailer in these parts."

"There is nothing here would catch her?" Donald Leslie asked. "Would a
rowboat have a chance of overtaking her?"

"Not this evening," the sailor said, looking at the sky. "The wind is
rising now, and it will blow a gale before morning."

"Tell me, my man," Leslie asked, "and here is a gold piece for your
pains, where you think she is likely to put in?"

"That will all depend," the sailor replied, "upon what errand she is
bound. I must know that before I can answer you."

Leslie looked at William Long. The latter said:

"It were best to tell this honest fellow the facts of the case. Look
you, my 'man, the two king's officers who have gone on board are ill
friends with the Campbells, and we doubt not that these have kidnaped
and carried them off."

"The Campbells are an ill crew to deal with," the sailor said, "and I do
not love them myself. If it be as you say, they might be landed either
at Anstruther, near which is a hold belonging to Andrew Campbell of
Glencoulie, or at St. Andrews, or at Leuchars, a little bay north of
that town, whence they might take them to Kilbeg Castle, also held by a
Campbell. It is a lonely place ten miles inland, and their friends would
be little likely to look for them there. Besides, the Royalist might
land them and sail away without any being the wiser, while at the other
ports her coming would be surely noticed."

"Think you that we can obtain horses on the other side?"

"You might obtain four or five," the sailor said, "of Tony Galbraith,
who keeps the inn there, and who lets horses on hire to those traveling
north."

"If a storm comes on," Leslie asked, "which way is it likely to blow,
and will the Royalist be like to make the bay you name?

"Ah! that is more than I can tell," the sailor replied. "Methinks 'twill
blow from the west. In that case, she might be able to make her way
along the shore; she might run into port for shelter; she might be blown
out to sea."

"At any rate," Leslie said, "our first step is to cross. Get us a stout
sailing boat. Be not sparing of promises."

The man at once went off to a group of sailors, but these at first shook
their heads, and looked toward the sky. Its aspect was threatening. The
wind was getting up fast, and masses of scud flew rapidly across it.
Leslie went up to the group.

"Come, lads," he said, "five pounds if you put us across."

The offer was too tempting to be rejected, and the men hurried down and
began to prepare a large sailing boat. Leslie and Lieutenant Long had a
hasty consultation, and agreed that, seeing the difficulty there would
be in obtaining horses, it was useless to take more than ten men in all.
Accordingly, as soon as the boat was in readiness, the two officers,
Mike, and seven soldiers took their places in her. The sails were
closely reefed, and she at once put out into the Firth. Every minute the
wind rose, until, by the time they were half across, it was blowing a
gale. The boat was a stout one, but the waves broke freely over her, and
four of the soldiers were kept at work baling to throw out the water she
took over her bows. Once or twice they thought that she would capsize,
so furious were the gusts, but the boatmen were quick and skillful. The
sheets were let go and the sails lowered until the force of the squall
abated, and at last, after a passage which seemed rapid even to those
on board, anxious as they were, she entered the little port.

Hurrying to the inn, they found that six horses were obtainable. These
they hired at once. The host said that he could send to some farms, not
far distant, and hire four more, but that an hour or so would elapse ere
they came. Leslie and William Long had already decided that the
prisoners would most probably be taken to Kilbeg Castle, as being more
secluded than the others. They now agreed that they themselves with Mike
and three soldiers should start at once, to intercept them if possible
between the sea and the castle. When the other horses arrived two of the
soldiers were to ride with all speed to Anstruther, and two to St.
Andrews, and were there to keep sharp watch to see if the Royalist
arrived there, and landed aught in the way either of men or goods.

The point to which they were bound lay fully forty miles away. They
determined to ride as far as the horses would carry them, and then, if
able to obtain no more, to walk forward. Night was already setting in,
and a driving rain flew before the gale.

"We shall never be able to keep the road," Leslie said, "Landlord, have
you one here who could serve as guide? He must be quick-footed and sure.
Our business is urgent, and we are ready to pay well."

A guide was speedily found, a lad on a shaggy pony, who had the day
before come down from the north with cattle. While the horses were being
prepared the party had taken a hasty supper, and Leslie had seen that
each of the soldiers had a tankard of hot spiced wine. So quickly had
the arrangements been made that in half an hour after their arrival at
the port the party started from the inn. The ride was indeed a rough
one. The country was heavy and wild. The rain drenched them to the skin
in spite of their thick cloaks, and the wind blew at times with such
violence that the horses were fain to stop and stand huddled together
facing it to keep their feet. Hour after hour they rode, never getting
beyond a walk, so rough was the road; often obliged to pause altogether
from the force of the gale. Twice they stopped at inns at quiet
villages, knocked up the sleeping hosts, and obtained hot wine for
themselves and hot gruel for their horses. Their pace grew slower as the
animals became thoroughly knocked up, and at last could not be urged
beyond a walk.

At the next village they stopped, and as they found that there was no
possibility of obtaining fresh horses, they determined to push forward
on foot. It was now four o'clock in the morning, and they had ridden
over forty miles. Another guide was obtained, and they set forward.
Although they had hurried to the utmost, it was ten o'clock in the
morning before they came down upon a valley with a narrow stream which
their guide told them fell into the sea, near Leuchars. They were, he
said, now within two miles of the castle, the track from which to the
sea ran down the valley. The wind was still blowing a gale, but the
clouds had broken, and at times the sun streamed out brightly.

"Thank Heaven we are here at last," Donald Leslie said, "for a harder
night I have never spent. I think we must be in time."

"I think so," William Long said. "Supposing the Royalist made the bay
safely, she would have been there by midnight, but the sea would have
been so high that I doubt if they would have launched a boat till
morning. It was light by five, but they might wait for the gale to abate
a little, and after landing they have eight miles to come. Of course,
they might have passed here an hour ago, but a incline to think that
they would not land till later, as with this wind blowing off shore, it
would be no easy matter to row a boat in its teeth."

The guide saying that there was a cottage a mile further up the valley,
he was sent there with instructions to ask whether any one had been seen
to pass that morning. After being half an hour absent he returned,
saying that there was only an old woman at the hut, and that she had
told him she was sure no one had passed there since daybreak. They now
followed the stream down the valley until they came to a small wood.
Here they lay down to rest, one being placed upon the lookout. Two hours
later the sentry awoke them with the news that a party of men were
coming up the valley. All were at once upon the alert.

"Thank Heaven," Leslie said, "we have struck the right place. There seem
to be ten or twelve of them, of whom two, no doubt, are the prisoners.
We shall have no difficulty in overcoming them by a sudden surprise.
Capture or kill every man if possible, or we shall have hot work in
getting back to Edinburgh."

When the party came nearer it could be seen that it consisted of eight
armed men, in the center of whom the two Royalist officers were walking.
Their arms were bound to their sides. Leslie arranged that he with Mike
and one of the soldiers would at once spring to their aid, as likely
enough, directly the attack began, the captors might endeavor to slay
their prisoners, to prevent them from being rescued. Mike was instructed
to strike no blow, but to devote himself at once to cutting their cords,
and placing weapons in their hands.

The surprise was complete. The sailors forming the majority of the
party, with two trusty retainers of the earl, who had special charge of
the affair, were proceeding carelessly along, having no thought of
interruption. So far their plans had succeeded perfectly. The moment
the two officers had reached the quay they were addressed by the men
sent on shore with the Royalist's boat. Unsuspicious of danger they took
their place in it, and therefore missed the opportunity, which they
would have had if they had entered any of the other boats, of learning
the true character of the Royalist. They had been attacked the instant
they gained the deck of the vessel. Harry, who was first, had been
knocked down before he had time to put his hand to his sword. Jacob had
fought valiantly for a short time, but he too had been knocked senseless
by a blow with a capstan bar. They had then been roughly tumbled below,
where no further attention had been paid to them. The Royalist had been
blown many miles out to sea, and did not make her anchorage until ten
o'clock in the morning. Then the hatches were removed, and the prisoners
brought on deck.

The inlet was a small one, and contained, only a little fishing village;
the prisoners saw the Royalist sail off again, directly they had been
placed in the boat. They had from the first moment when they regained
consciousness entertained no doubts whatever into whose hands they had
fallen, and they felt their position to be desperate. The plan, indeed,
had been skillfully laid, and had it not been for Harry reading the
order aloud in Mike's presence, there would have been no clew to their
disappearance. During the night the young men were too overpowered with
the violence of the storm, and the closeness of the atmosphere in the
hold, in which they had been thrown, to converse. But as the motion
moderated in the morning they had talked over their chances, and
pronounced them to be small indeed. Harry, indeed, remembered that Mike
had been present when he asked Jacob to accompany him on board ship, but
he thought that no uneasiness would be felt until late that night, as
it might well be thought that their duties had detained them, and that
they had supped on board. The storm might further account for their
non-appearance till morning. Then they imagined that inquiry would be
made, and that it would be found that the Royalist had sailed. Their
captors would then have a start of twenty-four hours, and in such
troubled times it was scarce likely that anything would be done. Nor
indeed did they see how they could be followed, as the destination of
the ship would be entirely unknown. The very fact that they had not been
thrown overboard when fairly out at sea was in itself a proof that their
captors entertained no fear of pursuit; had they done so, they would
have dispatched them at once. The captives felt sure that it was
intended to land them, in order that Argyll himself might have the
pleasure of taunting them before putting them to death. Against Jacob,
indeed, he could have no personal feeling, and it was by accident only
that he was a sharer in Harry's fate. But as a witness of what had taken
place, his life would assuredly be taken, as well as that of his
companion. As they walked along they gathered from the talk of their
guards the distance which they had to go, and the place of their
destination. They had never heard of Kilbeg Castle, but as they had no
enemies save Argyll, they knew that it must belong to one of his clan.
They spoke but little on the way. Harry was wondering how the news of
his disappearance would be received in the camp, and thinking of the
dismay which it would occasion in the minds of Mike and William Long,
when suddenly he heard a shout, and on the instant a fierce fight was
raging around him.

Although taken completely by surprise, the sailors fought steadily. But
two were cut down before they could draw a sword, and the others,
outmatched, were driven backward. The leader of the party shouted again
and again, "Kill the prisoners," but he and each of his men were too
hotly engaged with the adversaries who pressed them, to do more than
defend their own lives. In a minute the fray was rendered still more
unequal by Harry and Jacob joining in it, and in less than three minutes
from its commencement seven of the guards lay dead or dying upon the
ground. The other, an active young fellow, had taken to flight early in
the fight, and was already beyond reach.

The contest over, there was a delighted greeting between the rescued
prisoners and their friends.

"Come," Leslie said, "we have not a moment to lose. That fellow who has
escaped will take the news to Kilbeg, and we shall be having its
garrison at our heels. He has but three miles to run, and they will beat
to horse in a few minutes after he gets there. We must strike across the
hills, and had best make a great circuit by Stirling. If we avoid the
roads and towns they may not pick up our track."

Their guide fortunately knew the country well, and leaving the path by
which they had traveled, the party started on their return. All day they
tramped across the moorlands, avoiding all villages and scattered
farmhouses. They had, they knew, three-quarters of an hour's start, and
as their pursuers would be alike ignorant whence they came or whither
they were going, the chances of their hitting the right route were
small.

Making a circuit round Kinross and Alloa, where the Campbells might have
ridden in pursuit, and sleeping in a wood, they arrived next day at
Stirling. Here was great excitement, for Cromwell's army, marching south
of Edinburgh, had approached the town. They remained, however, a few
hours only, collecting what previsions they could, and then falling
back again to their former camp at Musselburgh. The following day Harry
and his party marched to Edinburgh. That night Harry reported to Sir
David Leslie what had befallen him and the next morning he accompanied
the general to Holyrood, and laid a complaint before the king.

His majesty was most indignant at the attempt which had been made upon
his follower, but he said to General Leslie, "I doubt not, Sir David,
that your thoughts and mine go toward the same person. But we have no
evidence that he had an absolute hand in it, although the fact that this
ship was commanded by a Campbell, and that the hold of Kilbeg belongs to
one of his kinsmen, point to his complicity in the affair. Still, that
is no proof. Already the earl is no friend of mine. When the day comes I
will have a bitter reckoning with him, but in the present state of my
fortunes, methinks that 'twere best in this, as in other matters, to
hold my tongue for the time. I cannot afford to make him an open enemy
now."

General Leslie agreed with the king. Cromwell's army was in a sore
strait, and would, they hoped, be shortly driven either to surrender or
to fight under disadvantageous circumstances. But the open defection of
Argyll at the present moment, followed as it would be by that of the
whole fanatical party, would entirely alter the position of affairs, and
Harry begged his majesty to take no more notice of the matter, and so
returned to the camp.




 

THE BATTLE OF WORCESTER.


The next morning the Scotch army moved after that of Cromwell, which had
fallen back to Dunbar, and took post on the Doon hill facing him there.
Cromwell's army occupied a peninsula, having on their face a brook
running along a deep, narrow little valley. The Scotch position on the
hill was an exceedingly strong one, and had they remained there
Cromwell's army must have been driven to surrender. Cromwell himself
wrote on that night, "The enemy hath blocked up our way at the pass at
Copperspath, through which we cannot pass without almost a miracle. He
lieth so upon the hills that we knoweth not how to come that way without
much difficulty, and our lying here daily consumeth our men, who fall
sick beyond imagination."

The Scotch had, in fact, the game in their hands, had they but waited on
the ground they had taken up. The English had, however, an ally in their
camp. The Earl of Argyll strongly urged that an attack should be made
upon the English, and he was supported by the preachers and fanatics,
who exclaimed that the Lord had delivered their enemies into their
hands. General Leslie, however, stood firm. The preachers scattered in
the camp and exhorted the soldiers to go down and smite the enemy. So
great an enthusiasm did they excite by their promises of victory that in
the afternoon the soldiers, without orders from their general, moved
down the hill toward the enemy. The more regular body of the troops
stood firm, but Leslie, seeing that the preachers had got the mastery,
and that his orders were no longer obeyed, ordered these also to move
forward, in hopes that the enthusiasm which had been excited would yet
suffice to win the victory.

Cromwell saw the fatal mistake which had been committed, and in the
night moved round his troops to his left, and these at daybreak fell
upon the Scottish right. The night had been wet, and the Scottish army
were unprovided with tents. Many of their matchlocks had been rendered
useless. At daybreak on the morning of the 3d of September the English,
led by General Lambert, fell upon them. The Scotch for a time stood
their ground firmly; but the irregular troops, who had by their folly
led the army into this plight, gave way before the English pikemen. The
preachers, who were in vast numbers, set the example of flight. Many of
the regiments of infantry fought most fiercely, but the battle was
already lost. The Scotch cavalry were broken by the charge of the
Ironsides, and in less than an hour from the commencement of the
fighting the rout was complete. Three thousand Scotch were killed, and
ten thousand taken prisoners.

Harry's regiment was but slightly engaged. It had been one of the last
to march down the hill on the evening before, and Harry and Jacob
foresaw the disaster which would happen. "If I were the king," Harry
said, "I would order every one of these preachers out of camp, and would
hang those who disobeyed. Then I would march the army on to the hill
again. If they wait there the English must attack us with grievous
disadvantage, or such as cannot get on board their ships must surrender.
Charles would really be king then, and could disregard the wrath of the
men of the conventicles. Cromwell will attack us to-morrow, and will
defeat us; his trained troops are more than a match for these Scotchmen,
who think more of their preachers than of their officers, and whose
discipline is of the slackest."

"I agree with you entirely," Jacob said. "But in the present mood of the
army, I believe that half of them would march away if the general
dismissed the preachers."

The next day, when the fight began, Harry moved forward his regiment to
the support of the Scottish right, but before he came fairly into the
fray this had already given away, and Harry, seeing that the day was
lost, halted his men, and fell back in good order. Again and again the
Ironsides charged them. The leveled pikes and heavy musketry fire each
time beat them off, and they marched from the field almost the only body
which kept its formation. Five thousand of the country people among the
prisoners Cromwell allowed to depart to their homes. The remainder he
sent to Newcastle, where great numbers of them were starved to death by
the cruelty of the governor, Sir Arthur Hazelrig. The remainder were
sent as slaves to New England.

Leslie, with the wreck of his army, fell back to Stirling, while
Charles, with the Scotch authorities, went to Perth. Here the young
king, exasperated beyond endurance at the tyranny of Argyll and the
fanatics, escaped from them, and with two or three friends rode fifty
miles north. He was overtaken and brought back to Perth, but the anger
of the army was so hot at his treatment that the fanatics were
henceforth obliged to put a curb upon themselves, and a strong king's
party, as opposed to that of the Covenant, henceforth guided his
counsels.

The winter passed quietly. The English troops were unable to stand the
inclemency of the climate, and contented themselves with capturing
Edinburgh Castle, and other strongholds south of the Forth. Cromwell was
compelled by ill health to return for some months to England. Leslie's
army was strongly intrenched round Stirling. In June Cromwell again took
the field, and moved against Perth, which he captured on the 31st of
July. Charles, who had joined his army at Stirling, broke up his camp
and marched toward England, the road being open to him owing to Cromwell
and his army being further north at Perth.

During the time which had elapsed since the battle of Dunbar no events
had happened in Harry's life. Remaining quietly in camp, where the
troops, who had been disgusted by the conduct of the fanatics at Dunbar,
were now ill disposed toward Argyll and his party, he had little fear of
the machinations of the earl, who was with the king at Perth.

Argyll refused to join in the southern march, and the army with which
Leslie entered England numbered only eleven thousand men. As soon as he
crossed the border, Charles was proclaimed king, and proclamations were
issued calling on all loyal subjects to join him.

The people were, however, weary of civil war. The Royalists had already
suffered so heavily that they held back now, and the hatred excited,
alike by the devastations of the Scotch army on its former visit to
England, and by the treachery with which they had then sold the king,
deterred men from joining them. A few hundred, indeed, came to his
standard; but upon the other hand, Lambert and Harrison, with a strong
force, were marching against him, and Cromwell, having left six thousand
men in Scotland, under Monk, was pressing hotly behind with the victors
of Dunbar. On the 22d of August Charles reached Worcester. On the 28th
Cromwell was close to the town with thirty thousand men.

"This is the end of it all, Jacob," Harry said that night. "They
outnumber us by three to one, and even if equal, they would assuredly
beat us, for the Scotch are dispirited at finding themselves so far from
home, in a hostile country. Things look desperate. If all is lost
to-morrow, do you and William Long and Mike keep close to me. Get a
horse for Mike to-night. You and Long are already mounted. If all is
lost we must try and make our way to the seacoast, and take boat for
France or Holland. But first of all we must see to the safety of the
king. It is clear that at present England is not ready to return to the
former state of things. We must hope that some day she will weary of the
Roundhead rule, and if the king can reach the Continent he must remain
there till England calls him. At present she only wants peace. It is
just nine years now since King Charles' father set up his standard at
Nottingham. Nine years of wars and troubles! No wonder men are aweary of
it. It is all very well for us, Jacob, who have no wives, neither
families nor occupations, and are without property to lose, but I wonder
not that men who have these things are chary of risking them in a cause
which seems destined to failure."

Upon the 3d of September, 1651, the anniversary of the battle of Dunbar,
Cromwell advanced to the attack. Harry's regiment was placed among some
hedges around the city, and upon them the brunt of the fight first fell.
In spite of the immense numbers brought against them they defended
themselves with desperate bravery. Some of the Scottish troops came up,
and for a time Cromwell's footmen could make but little way. At other
parts, however, the resistance was more feeble, and the Scotch fell
rapidly into confusion. Contesting every foot of the way, Harry's
regiment was driven back into the town, where a terrible confusion
reigned. Still keeping his men together, he marched to the marketplace.
Here he found the king with a considerable body of horse. The greater
part, however, of the horse had fled through the town without drawing
rein, while the foot were throwing away their arms and flying in all
directions.

"If all my troops had fought like your regiment, Colonel Furness, we
should have won the day," the king said. "As it is now, it is a hopeless
rout. It is useless for your brave fellows to throw away their lives
further. They will only be cut down vainly, seeing that the rest of my
army are disbanded. Thank them from me for their services, and bid them
seek their homes as best they may and wait for better times. They are
English, and will meet with better treatment from the country people
than will the Scotch. Then do you join me. I am going to head my
horsemen here in a charge against the Roundhead cavalry, and so give
more time for the army to get away."

Harry rode up to his troops, now reduced to half their former strength.
Leslie and Grahame had both been killed, and William Long was sorely
wounded. He gave the men the message from the king, and the brave
fellows gave a cheer for King Charles, the last he was to hear for ten
years. Then they marched away in orderly array, with their arms,
intending to beat off all who might attack them before nightfall, and
then to break up and scatter, each for himself. William Long had friends
near Gloucester, and as his wound would prevent him from traveling
rapidly with Harry, he took farewell of him, and rode away with the
regiment. Harry, with Jacob and Mike, rejoined the king, and they rode
toward the gate by which the Roundhead troops were already entering the
town. The horsemen, however, had but little stomach for the fight, and
as the king advanced, in twos and threes they turned their horses'
heads and rode off.

Harry was riding close to the king, and looking round said at length,
"It is useless, your majesty. There are not a dozen men with us."

The king looked round and checked his horse. Besides his personal
friends, Buckingham, Wilmot, and one or two other nobles, scarce a man
remained. The king shrugged his shoulders. "Well, gentlemen, as we
cannot fight, we must needs run." Then the party turned their horses and
galloped out on the other side of Worcester. The country was covered
with fugitives. They soon came upon a considerable body of horse, who at
once attached themselves to the party. "These, gentlemen," the king
said, "would not fight when I wanted them to, and now that I would fain
be alone, they follow me."

At last, when darkness came on, the king, with his personal friends and
some sixty others, slipped away down a by-road, and after riding for
some hours came to a house called the White Ladies. Here for a few hours
they rested. Then a council was held. They had news that on a heath near
were some three thousand Scotch cavalry. The king's friends urged him to
join these and endeavor to make his way back into Scotland, but Charles
had already had more than enough of that country, and he was sure that
Argyll and his party would not hesitate to deliver him up to the
Parliament, as they had done his father before him. He therefore
determined to disguise himself, and endeavor to escape on foot, taking
with him only a guide. The rest of the party agreed to join the Scotch
horse, and endeavor to reach the border. After a consultation with
Jacob, Harry determined to follow the example of the king, and to try
and make his way in disguise to a seaport. He did not believe that the
Scotch cavalry would be able to regain their country, nor even if they
did would his position be improved were he with them. With the
destruction of the Royalist army, Argyll would again become supreme, and
Harry doubted not that he would satisfy his old grudge against him. He
was right in his anticipations. The Scots were a day or two later routed
by the English horse, and comparatively few of them ever regained their
country. Out of the eleven thousand men who fought at Worcester, seven
thousand were taken prisoners, including the greater part of the
Scottish contingent. The English, attracting less hostility and
attention from the country people, for the most part reached their homes
in safety.

As soon as the king had ridden off, Harry with Jacob and Mike, started
in another direction. Stopping at a farmhouse, they purchased from the
master three suits of clothes. Harry's was one of the farmer's own, the
man being nearly his own size. For Jacob, who was much shorter, a dress,
cloak and bonnet of the farmer's wife was procured, and for Mike the
clothes of one of the farmer's sons. One of the horses was left here,
and a pillion obtained for the other. Putting on these disguises, Harry
mounted his horse, with Jacob seated behind him on a pillion, while Mike
rode by his side. They started amid the good wishes of the farmer and
his family, who were favorable to the Royalist cause. Harry had cut off
his ringlets, and looked the character of a young farmer of twenty-four
or twenty-five years old well enough, while Jacob had the appearance of
a suitable wife for him. Mike was to pass as his brother.

In the course of the first day's journey they met several parties of
Roundhead horse, who plied them with questions as to whether they had
seen any parties of fugitives. Making a detour, they rode toward
Gloucester, not intending to enter that town, where there was a
Parliamentary garrison, but to cross the river higher up. They stopped
for the night at a wayside inn, where they heard much talk concerning
the battle, and learned that all the fords were guarded to prevent
fugitives crossing into Wales, and that none might pass who could not
give a good account of themselves. They heard, too, that on the evening
before a proclamation had been made at Gloucester and other towns
offering a reward of a thousand pounds for the capture of Charles, and
threatening all with the penalties of treason who should venture to aid
or shelter him; a systematic watch was being set on all the roads.

They determined to ride again next morning toward Worcester, and to
remain in that neighborhood for some days, judging that less inquiry
would be made there than elsewhere. This they did, but journeyed very
slowly, and slept a mile or two from Worcester.

Before reaching their halting-place they took off a shoe from Mike's
horse, and with a nail wounded the frog of the foot, so that the animal
walked lame. Under this pretense they stopped three days, feigning great
annoyance at the delay. They found now that orders had been issued that
none should journey on the roads save those who had passes, and these
had to be shown before entering any of the large towns. They therefore
resolved to leave their horses, and to proceed on foot, as they could
then travel by byways and across the country. There was some debate as
to the best guise in which to travel, but it was presently determined to
go as Egyptians, as the gypsies were then called. Harry walked into
Worcester, and there, at the shop of a dealer in old clothes, procured
such garments as were needed, and at an apothecary's purchased some dyes
for staining the skin.

The next day, telling the landlord that they should leave the lame
horse with him until their return, they started as before, Mike walking
instead of riding. They presently left the main road, and finding a
convenient place in a wood, changed their attire. Harry and Mike were
dressed in ragged clothes, with bright handkerchiefs round their necks,
and others round their heads. Jacob still retained his attire as a
woman, with a tattered shawl round his shoulders, and a red handkerchief
over his head. All darkened their faces and hands. They took the saddle
from the horse, and placed the bundles, containing the clothes they had
taken off, on his back. Mike took the bridle, Harry and Jacob walked
beside, and so they continued for some miles along the lonely roads,
until they came to a farmhouse. Here they stopped. The farmer came out,
and roughly demanded what they wanted. Harry replied that he wanted to
sell their horse, and would take a small sum for it.

"I doubt me," the farmer said, looking at it, "that that horse was not
honestly come by. It suits not your condition. It may well be," he said,
"the horse of some officer who was slain at Worcester, and which you
have found roaming in the country."

"It matters not," Harry said, "where I got it; it is mine now, and may
be yours if you like it, cheap. As you say, its looks agree not with
mine, and I desire not to be asked questions. If you will give me that
donkey I see there, and three pounds, you shall have him."

The offer was a tempting one, but the farmer beat them down a pound
before he agreed to it. Then shifting their bundles to the donkey, they
continued their way. At the next village they purchased a cooking-pot
and some old stuff for a tent. Cutting some sticks, they encamped that
night on some wild land hard by, having purchased provisions for their
supper. Very slowly they traveled south, attracting no attention as
they passed. They avoided all large towns, and purchased such things as
they needed at villages, always camping out on commons and waste places.
They could hear no news of the king at any of their halting-places. That
he had not been taken was certain; also, that he had not reached France,
or the news of his coming there would have been known. It was generally
supposed that he was in hiding somewhere in the south, hoping to find an
opportunity to take ship to France. Everywhere they heard of the active
search which was being made for him, and how the houses of all suspected
to be favorable to him were being searched.

Traveling only a few miles a day, and frequently halting for two or
three days together, the party crossed the Thames above Reading, and
journeyed west into Wiltshire. So they went on until they reached the
port of Charmouth, near Lime Regis. Here, as in all the seaport towns,
were many soldiers of the Parliament. They did not enter the town, but
encamped a short distance outside, Harry alone going in to gather the
news. He found that numerous rumors concerning the king were afloat. It
was asserted that he had been seen near Bristol, and failing to embark
there, was supposed to be making his way east along the coast, in hopes
of finding a ship. The troops were loud in their expressions of
confidence that in a few days, if not in a few hours, he would be in
their hands, and that he would be brought to the scaffold, as his father
had been.

Uneasy at the news, Harry wandered about the town, and at nightfall
entered a small public house near the port. Calling for some liquor, he
sat down, and listened to the talk of the sailors. Presently these left,
and soon after they did so three other men entered. One was dressed as a
farmer, the other two as serving-men. Harry thought that he noticed a
glance of recognition pass between the farmer and the landlord, and as
the latter placed some liquor and a candle on the table before the
newcomers, Harry recognized in the farmer Colonel Wyndham, a Royalist
with whom he was well acquainted. He now looked more closely at the two
serving-men, and recognized in them the king and Lord Wilmot.

He sauntered across the room as if to get a light for his pipe, and
said, in low tones:

"Colonel Wyndham, I am Harry Furness. Is there any way I can serve his
majesty?"

"Ah! Colonel Furness, I am glad to see you," the king said heartily;
"though if you are hunted as shrewdly as I am, your state is a perilous
one."

"The landlord is to be trusted," Colonel Wyndham said. "We had best call
him in. He said nothing before you, deeming you a stranger."

The landlord was called in, and told Harry was a friend, whereupon he
barred the door and closed the shutters, as if for the night. Then
turning to Colonel Wyndham, whom alone he knew, he said:

"I am sorry to say that my news is bad, sir. An hour since I went round
to the man who had engaged to take you across to St. Malo, but his wife
has got an inkling of his intentions. She has locked him into his room,
and swears that if he attempts to come forth she will give the alarm to
the Parliament troops; for that she will not have herself and her
children sacrificed by meddlings of his in the affairs of state."




 

ACROSS THE SEA.


The announcement of the innkeeper struck consternation into the party.

"This is bad news indeed," Colonel Wyndham said; "what does your majesty
advise now?"

"I know not, my good Wyndham," King Charles replied. "Methinks 'twere
better that I should give myself up at once. Fate seems against us, and
I'm only bringing danger on all my friends."

"Your friends are ready to risk the danger," Colonel Wyndham said; "and
I doubt not that we shall finally place your majesty in safety. I think
we had best try Bridport. Unfortunately, the Roundheads are so sure of
your being on the coast that it is well-nigh impossible to procure a
ship, so strict is the search of all who leave port. If we could but put
them off your scent, and lead them to believe that you have given it up
in despair here, and are trying again to reach Scotland, it might throw
them off their guard, and make it more easy for us to find a ship."

"I might do that," Harry said. "I have with me my comrade Jacob, who is
about the king's height and stature. I will travel north again, and will
in some way excite suspicion that he is the king. The news that your
majesty has been seen traveling there will throw them off your track
here."

"But you may be caught yourself," the king said. "The Earl of Derby and
other officers have been executed. There would be small chance for you
were you to fall into their hands."

"I trust that I shall escape, sire. My friend Jacob is as cunning as a
fox, and will, I warrant me, throw dust in their eyes. And how has it
fared with your majesty since I left you at White Ladies?"

"Faith," Charles replied, laughing, "I have been like a rat with the
dogs after him. The next night after leaving you I was in danger from a
rascally miller, who raised an alarm because we refused to stay at his
bidding. Then we made for Moseley, where I hoped to cross the Severn.
The Roundheads had set a guard there, and Richard Penderell went to the
house of Mr. Woolfe, a loyal gentleman, and asked him for shelter for an
officer from Worcester. Mr. Woolfe said he would risk his neck for none
save the king himself. Then Richard told him who I was, and brought me
in. Mr. Woolfe hid me in the barn and gave me provisions. The
neighborhood was dangerous, for the search was hot thereabout, and I
determined to double back again to White Ladies, that I might hear what
had become of Wilmot. Richard Penderell guided me to Boscabell, a
farmhouse kept by his brother William. Here I found Major Careless in
hiding. The search was hot, and we thought of hiding in a wood near, but
William advised that as this might be searched we should take refuge in
an oak lying apart in the middle of the plain."

"This had been lopped three or four years before and had grown again
very thick and bushy, so that it could not be seen through. So, early in
the morning, Careless and I, taking provisions for the day, climbed up
it and hid there, and it was well we did so, for in the day the
Roundheads came and searched the wood from end to end, as also the
house. But they did not think of the tree. The next two days I lay at
Boscabell, and learned on the second day that Wilmot was hiding at the
house of Mr. Whitgrave, a Catholic gentleman at Moseley, where he begged
me to join him. That night I rode thither. The six Penderells, for there
were that number of brothers, rode with me as a bodyguard. I was well
received by Mr. Whitgrave, who furnished me with fresh linen, to my
great comfort, for that which I had on was coarse, and galled my flesh
grievously, and my feet were so sore I could scarce walk. But the
Roundheads were all about, and the search hot, and it was determined
that I should leave. This time I was dressed as a decent serving man,
and Colonel Lane's daughter agreed to go with me. I was to pass as her
serving man, taking her to Bristol. A cousin rode with us in company.
Colonel Lane procured us a pass, and we met with no adventure for three
days. A smith who shod my horse, which had cast a shoe, did say that
that rogue Charles Stuart had not been taken yet, and that he thought he
ought to be hanged. I thought so too, so we had no argument. At Bristol
we could find no ship in which I could embark, and after some time I
went with Miss Lane and her cousin to my good friend Colonel Wyndham, at
Trent House. After much trouble he had engaged a ship to take me hence,
and now this rascal refuses to go, or rather his wife refuses for him.
And now, my friend, we will at once make for Bridport, since Colonel
Wyndham hopes to find a ship there. I trust we may meet ere long in
France. None of my friends have served me and my father more faithfully
than you. It would seem but a mockery now to take knighthood at the
hands of Charles Stuart, but it will not harm thee."

Taking a sword from Colonel Wyndham, the king dubbed Harry knight. Then
giving his hand to the landlord to kiss, Charles, accompanied by his
two companions, left the inn.

A few minutes later Harry started and joined his friends. Jacob agreed
at once to the proposal to throw the Roundheads off King Charles' track.
The next day they started north, and traveled through Wiltshire up into
Gloucestershire, still keeping their disguises as gypsies. There they
left their donkey with a peasant, telling him they would return in a
fortnight's time and claim it. In a wood near they again changed their
disguise, hid their gypsy dresses, and started north on foot. In the
evening they stopped at Fairford, and took up their abode at a small
inn, where they asked for a private room. They soon ascertained that the
landlord was a follower of the Parliament. Going toward the room into
which they were shown, Jacob stumbled, and swore in a man's voice, which
caused the servant maid who was conducting them to start and look
suspiciously at him. Supper was brought, but Harry noticed that the
landlord, who himself brought it in, glanced several times at Jacob.
They were eating their supper when they heard his footstep again coming
along the passage. Harry dropped on one knee, and was in the act of
handing the jug in that attitude to Jacob, when the landlord entered.
Harry rose hastily, as if in confusion, and the landlord, setting down
on the table a dish which he had brought, again retired.

"Throw up the window, Jacob, and listen," Harry said. "We must not be
caught like rats in a trap."

The window opened into a garden, and Jacob, listening, could hear
footsteps as of men running in the streets.

"That is enough, then," Harry said. "The alarm is given. Now let us be
off." They leaped from the window, and they were soon making their way
across the country. They had not been gone a hundred yards before they
heard a great shouting, and knew that their departure had been
discovered. They had not walked far that day and now pressed forward
north. They had filled their pockets with the remains of their supper,
and after walking all night, left the road, and climbing into a haystack
at a short distance, ate their breakfast and were soon fast asleep.

It was late in the afternoon before they awoke. Then they walked on
until, after darkness fell, they entered a small village. Here they went
into a shop to buy bread. The woman looked at them earnestly.

"I do not know whether it concerns you," she said, "but I will warn you
that this morning a mounted man from Fairford came by warning all to
seize a tall countryman with a young fellow and a woman with him, for
that she was no other than King Charles."

"Thanks, my good woman," Jacob said. "Thanks for your warning. I do not
say that I am he you name, but whether or no, the king shall hear some
day of your good-will."

Traveling on again, they made thirty miles that night, and again slept
in a wood. The next evening, when they entered a village to buy food,
the man in the shop, after looking at them, suddenly seized Jacob, and
shouted loudly for help. Harry stretched him on the ground with a heavy
blow of the stout cudgel he carried. The man's shouts, however, had
called up some of his neighbors, and these ran up as they issued from
the shop, and tried to seize them. The friends, however, struck out
lustily with their sticks, Jacob carrying one concealed beneath his
dress. In two or three minutes they had fought their way clear, and ran
at full speed through the village, pursued by a shouting crowd of
rustics.

"Now," Harry said, "we can return for our gypsy dresses, and then make
for the east coast. We have put the king's enemies off the scent. I
trust that when we may get across the water we may hear that he is in
safety."

They made a long detour, traveling only at night, Harry entering alone
after dusk the villages where it was necessary to buy food. When they
regained the wood where they had left their disguises they dressed
themselves again as gypsies, called for the donkey, and then journeyed
across England by easy stages to Colchester, where they succeeded in
taking passage in a lugger bound for Hamburg. They arrived there in
safety, and found to their great joy the news had arrived that the king
had landed in France.

He had, they afterward found, failed to obtain a ship at Bridport, where
when he arrived he here found a large number of soldiers about to cross
to Jersey. He returned to Trent House, and a ship at Southampton was
then engaged. But this was afterward taken up for the carriage of
troops. A week later a ship lying at Shoreham was hired to carry a
nobleman and his servant to France, and King Charles, with his friends,
made his way thither in safety. The captain of the ship at once
recognized the king, but remained true to his promise, and landed him at
Fécamp in Normandy.

Six weeks had elapsed since the battle of Worcester, and during that
time the king's hiding-places had been known to no less than forty-five
persons, all of whom proved faithful to the trust, and it was owing to
their prudence and caution as well as to their loyalty that the king
escaped, in spite of the reward offered and the hot search kept up
everywhere for him.

Harry had now to settle upon his plans for the future. There was no hope
whatever of an early restoration. He had no thought of hanging about the
king whose ways and dissolute associates revolted him. It was open to
him to take service, as so many of his companions had done, in one or
other of the Continental armies, but Harry had had more than enough of
fighting. He determined then to cross the ocean to the plantations of
Virginia, where many loyal gentlemen had established themselves. The
moneys which Colonel Furness had during the last four years regularly
sent across to a banker at the Hague, for his use, were lying untouched,
and these constituted a sum amply sufficient for establishing himself
there. Before starting, however, he determined that if possible he would
take a wife with him. In all his wanderings he had never seen any one he
liked so much as his old playmate, Lucy Rippinghall. It was nearly four
years since he had seen her, and she must now be twenty-one. Herbert, he
knew by his father's letters, had left the army at the end of the first
civil war, and was carrying on his father's business, the wool-stapler
having been killed at Marston Moor. Harry wrote to the colonel, telling
him of his intention to go to Virginia and settle there until either
Cromwell's death, and the dying out of old animosities, or the
restoration of the king permitted him to return to England, and also
that he was writing to ask Lucy Rippinghall to accompany him as his
wife. He told his father that he was well aware that he would not have
regarded such a match as suitable had he been living at home with him at
Furness Hall, but that any inequality of birth would matter no whit in
the plantations of Virginia, and that such a match would greatly promote
his happiness there. By the same mail he wrote to Herbert Rippinghall.

"My DEAR HERBERT: The bonds of affection which held us together when
boys are in no way slackened in their hold upon me, and you showed, when
we last met, that you loved me in no way less than of old. I purpose
sailing to Virginia with such store of money as would purchase a
plantation there, and there I mean to settle down until such times as
these divisions in England may be all passed. But I would fain not go
alone. As a boy I loved your sister Lucy, and I have seen none to take
the place of her image in my heart. She is, I know, still unmarried, but
I know not whether she has any regard for me. I do beseech you to sound
her, and if she be willing to give her to me. I hear that you are well
married, and can therefore the better spare her. If she be willing to
take me, I will be a good husband to her, and trust some day or other to
bring her back to be lady of Furness Hall. Although I know that she will
care little for such things, I may say that she would be Lady Lucy,
since the king has been pleased to make me Sir Harry Furness. Should the
dear girl be willing, will you, since I cannot come to you, bring her
hither to me. I have written to my father, and have told him what I
purpose to do. Trusting that this will find you as well disposed toward
me as ever, I remain, your affectionate friend, HARRY FURNESS."

This letter, together with that to his father, Harry gave to Mike. The
post in those days was extremely irregular, and none confided letters of
importance to it which could possibly be sent by hand. Such a
communication as that to Herbert Rippinghall was not one which Harry
cared to trust to the post. Mike had never been at Abingdon, and would
therefore be unknown there. Nor, indeed, unless they were taken
prisoners in battle or in the first hot pursuit, were any of lower
degree meddled with after their return to their homes. There was
therefore no fear whatever of molestation. At this time Jacob was far
from well. The fatigues which he had undergone since the king broke up
his camp at Stirling had been immense. Prolonged marches, great anxiety,
sleeping on wet ground, being frequently soaked to the skin by heavy
rains, all these things had told upon him, and now that the necessity
for exertion was over, a sort of low fever seized him, and he was
forced to take to his bed. The leech whom Harry called in told him that
Jacob needed rest and care more than medicine. He gave him, however,
cooling drinks, and said that when the fever passed he would need
strengthening food and medicine.

Hamburg was at that time the resort of many desperate men from England.
After Worcester, as after the crushing out of the first civil war, those
too deeply committed to return to their homes sought refuge here. But
though all professed to be Cavaliers, who were suffering only from their
loyalty to the crown, a great many of them were men who had no just
claim to so honorable a position. There were many who took advantage of
the times in England to satisfy private enmities or to gratify evil
passions. Although the courts of law sat during the whole of the civil
war, and the judges made their circuits, there was necessarily far more
crime than in ordinary times. Thus many of those who betook themselves
to Hamburg and other seaports on the continent had made England too hot
for them by crimes of violence and dishonesty.

The evening after Mike sailed Harry, who had been sitting during the
afternoon chatting by Jacob's bedside, went out to take the air. He
strolled along the wharves, near which were the drinking-houses, whence
came sounds of singing, dancing, and revelry, mingled occasionally with
shouts and the clash of steel, as quarrels arose among the sailors and
others frequenting them. Never having seen one of these places, Harry
strolled into one which appeared of a somewhat better class than the
rest. At one end was a sort of raised platform, upon which were two men,
with fiddles, who, from time to time, played lively airs, to which those
at the tables kept time by stamping their feet. Sometimes men or women
came on to the platform and sang. The occupants of the body of the hall
were mostly sailors, but among whom were a considerable number of men,
who seemed by their garb to be broken-down soldiers and adventurers.

Harry took his seat by the door, called for a glass of wine and drank
it, and, having soon seen enough of the nature of the entertainment, was
about to leave, when his attention was attracted by a young girl who
took her place on the platform. She was evidently a gypsy, for at this
time these people were the minstrels of Europe. It would have been
considered shameful for any other woman to sing publicly. Two or three
of these women had already sung, and Harry had been disgusted with their
hard voices and bold looks. But he saw that the one who now took her
place on the platform was of a different nature. She advanced nervously,
and as if quite strange to such a scene, and touched her guitar with
trembling fingers. Then she began to sing a Spanish romance in a sweet,
pure voice. There was a good deal of applause when it finished, for even
the rough sailors could appreciate the softness and beauty of the
melody. Then a half-drunken man shouted, "Give us something lively.
Sing 'May the Devil fly off with Old Noll.'"

The proposal was received with a shout of approval by many, but some of
the sailors cried out, "No, no. No politics. We won't hear Cromwell
insulted."

This only led to louder and more angry shouts on the part of the others,
and in all parts of the room men rose to their feet, gesticulating and
shouting. The girl, who evidently did not understand a word that was
said, stood looking with affright at the tumult which had so suddenly
risen. In a minute swords were drawn. The foreign sailors, in ignorance
of the cause of dispute, drew their knives, and stood by the side of
those from the English ships, while the foreign soldiers seemed ready
to make common cause with the English who had commenced the disturbance.
Two or three of the latter leaped upon the platform to insist upon their
wishes being carried out. The girl, with a little scream, retreated into
a corner. Harry, indignant at the conduct to his countrymen, had drawn
his sword, and made his way quietly toward the end of the hall, and he
now sprang upon the platform.

"Stand back," he shouted angrily. "I'll spit the first man who advances
a step."

"And who are you, sir, who ventures to thrust yourself into a quarrel,
and to interfere with English gentlemen?"

"English gentlemen," Harry said bitterly. "God help England if you are
specimens of her gentlemen."

"S'death!" exclaimed one. "Run the scoundrel through, Ralph."

In a moment Harry slashed open the cheek of one, and ran the other
through the arm. By this time the fray had become general in the hall.
Benches were broken up, swords and knives were used freely. Just as the
matter began to grow serious there was a cry of "The watch!" and a
strong armed guard entered the hall.

There was an instant cessation of hostilities, and then both parties
uniting, rushed upon the watch, and by sheer weight bore them back out
of the place. Harry looked round, and saw that the girl had fled by a
door at the back of the platform. Seeing that a fight was going on round
the door, and desiring to escape from the broil, he went out by the door
she had taken, followed a passage for some distance, went down a
dimly-lighted stair, and issued through a door into the air. He found
himself in a foul and narrow lane. It was entirely unlighted, and Harry
made his way with difficulty along, stumbling into holes in the
pavement, and over heaps of rubbish of all kinds.

"I have got into a nice quarter of the town," he muttered to himself.
"I have heard there are places in Hamburg, the resort of thieves and
scoundrels of the worst kind, and where even the watch dare not
penetrate, Methinks that this must be one them."

He groped his way along till he came to the end of the lane. Here a dim
light was burning. Three or four other lanes, in appearance as
forbidding as that up which he had come, met at this spot. Several men
were standing about. Harry paused for a moment, wondering whether he had
better take the first turning at random, or invite attention by asking
his way. He determined that the former was the least dangerous
alternative, and turned down the lane to his right. He had not gone ten
steps when a woman came up to him from behind.

"Are you not the gentleman who drew a sword to save me from insult?" she
asked in French.

Harry understood enough of the language to make out what she said.

"Yes," he said, "if you are the singer."

"Good heavens! sir, what misfortune has brought you here? I recognized
your face in the light. Your life, sir, is in the greatest danger. There
are men here who would murder you for the sake of a gold piece, and that
jewel which fastens your plume must have caught their eyes. Follow me,
sir, quickly."




 

A PLOT OVERHEARD.


As the gypsy ended her warning she sprang forward, saying, "Follow me,
for your life, sir." Harry did not hesitate. He heard several footsteps
coming down the lane, and drawing his sword he followed his guide at a
run. As he did so there was a shout among the men behind him and these
set off in hot pursuit. Harry kept close to the girl, who turned down
another lane even more narrow than that they were leaving. A few paces
further she stopped, opened a door and entered. Harry followed her in
and she closed the door behind her.

"Hush!" she whispered. "There are men here as bad as those without. Take
off your shoes."

Harry did as directed. He was in pitch darkness. Taking him by the hand,
the girl led him forward for some distance.

"There is a staircase here," she whispered.

Still holding his hand, she began to mount the stairs. As they passed
each landing Harry heard the voices of men in the rooms on either side.
At last they arrived at the top of the house. Here she opened a door,
and led Harry into a room.

"Are you here, mother?" she asked.

There was no answer. The girl uttered an exclamation of thankfulness;
then, after groping about, she found a tinder-box, and struck a light.

"You are safe here for the present. This is my room, where I live with
my mother. At least," she sighed, "she calls herself my mother, and is
the only one I have known."

"Is it possible," Harry asked in surprise, "that one like yourself can
live in such an abode as this?"

"I am safe here," she answered. "There are five men of my tribe in the
next room, and fierce and brutal as are the men of these courts, none of
them would care to quarrel with the gypsies. But now I have got you
here, how am I to get you away?"

"If the gypsies are so feared, I might go out with them," Harry said.

"Alas!" the girl answered, "they are as had as the others. And even if
they were disposed to aid you for the kindness you have shown me, I
doubt if they could do so. Assuredly they would not run the risk of
thwarting the cutthroats here for the sake of saving you."

"Could you go and tell the watch?" Harry asked.

"The watch never comes here," the girl replied, shaking her head. "Were
they to venture up these lanes it would be like entering a hive of bees.
This is an Alsatia--a safe refuge for assassins and robbers."

"I have got myself into a nice mess," Harry said. "It seems to me I had
better sally out and take my chance."

"Look," the girl said, going to the window and opening it.

Peering out, Harry saw below a number of men with swords and knives
drawn. One or two had torches, and they were examining every doorway and
court. Outside the window ran a parapet.

"They will search like hounds," the girl continued. "They must know that
you have not gone far. If they come here you must take to the parapet,
and go some distance along. Now, I must try and find some disguise for
you."

At this moment the door opened, and an old woman entered. She uttered
an exclamation of astonishment at seeing Harry, and turning angrily to
the girl, spoke to her in the gypsy dialect. For two or three minutes
the conversation continued in that language; then the old woman turned
to Harry, and said in English:

"My daughter tells me that you have got into a broil on her behalf.
There are few gentlemen who draw sword for a gypsy. I will do my best to
aid you, but it will be difficult to get a gallant like yourself out of
this place."

Her eye fell covetously upon the jewel in Harry's hat. He noticed the
glance.

"Thanks, dame," he said; "I will gladly repay your services. Will you
accept this token?" And removing the jewel from the hat, he offered it
to her.

The girl uttered an angry exclamation as the old woman seized it, and
after examining it by the candle light, placed it in a small iron
coffer. Harry felt he had done wisely, for the old woman's face bore a
much warmer expression of good-will than had before characterized it.

"You cannot leave now," she said. "I heard as I came along that a
well-dressed gallant had been seen in the lanes, and every one's mouth
is on water. They said that they thought he had some woman with him, but
I did not dream it was Zita. You cannot leave to-night; to-morrow I will
get you some clothes of my son's, and in these you should be able to
escape without detection."

Very slowly the hours passed. The women at times talked together in
Romaic, while Harry, who had possession of the only chair in the room,
several times nodded off to sleep. In the morning there was a movement
heard in the next room, and the old woman went in there.

"Surely that woman cannot be your mother?" Harry said to the girl.

"She is not," she answered. "I believe that I was stolen as a child;
indeed, they have owned as much. But what can I do? I am one of them.
What can a gypsy do? We are good for nothing but to sing and to steal."

"If I get free from this scrape," Harry said, "you may be sure that
shall not be ungrateful, and if you long to leave this life, I can
secure you a quiet home in England with my father."

The girl clasped her hands in delight.

"Oh, that would be too good!" she exclaimed. "Too good; but I fear it
can never be."

She put her fingers to her lips, as the door again opened. The old woman
entered, carrying some clothes.

"Here," she said; "they have gone out; put these on, Zita and I will go
out and see if the coast is clear."

Harry, smiling to himself at the singularity of his having twice to
disguise himself as a gypsy, rapidly changed his clothes. Presently the
old woman returned.

"Quick," she exclaimed; "I hear that the news of the riot in the
drinking-house has got about this morning, and it is known that an
Englishman, something like the one seen in the lanes, took Zita's part,
and there are suspicions that it was she who acted as his guide. They
have been roughly questioning us. I told her to go on to avoid
suspicion, while I ran back. You cannot stir out now, and I heard a talk
of searching our rooms. Come, then, we may find a room unoccupied below;
you must take refuge there for the present."

Harry still retained his sword, incongruous as it was with his attire,
but he had determined to hide it under his clothes, so that, if
detected, he might be able at least to sell his life. Taking it in his
hand, he followed the old woman downstairs. She listened at each door,
and continued downward until she reached the first floor.

"I can hear no one here," she said, listening at a door. "Go up a few
steps; I will knock. If any one is there I can make some excuse."

She knocked, but there was no answer. Then she drew from her pocket a
piece of bent wire, and inserted it in the keyhole.

"We gypsies can enter where we will," she said, beckoning Harry to enter
as the door opened. "Wait quiet here till I come for you. The road will
be clear then." So saying, she closed the door behind him, and again
shot the bolt.

Harry felt extremely uncomfortable. Should the owner of the room return,
he would be taken for a thief, although, as he thought, looking round
the room, there was little enough to steal. It was a large room, with
several truckle beds standing against the walls. In the center was a
table, upon which were some mugs, horns, and empty bottles, with some
dirty cards scattered about. The place smelled strongly of tobacco, and
benches lying on the ground showed that the party of the night before
had ended in a broil, further evidence to which was given by stains of
blood on one of the beds, and by a rag saturated with blood, which lay
beside it. At one side of the room was a door, giving communication into
the next apartment. Scarcely had Harry entered when he heard voices
there, and was surprised to find that the speakers were English.

"I tell you I'm sick of this," one of the speakers said. "I might be as
well hanged at home as starved here."

"You might enlist," another voice said, in sneering tones. "Gallant
soldiers are welcome in the Low Countries."

"You'd best keep your sneering tongue between your lips," the other said
angrily. "If I don't care for fighting in the field, I can use a knife
at a pinch, as you know full well. You will carry your gibes too far
with me some day. No," he went on more calmly, after a pause, "I shall
go back to England next week, after Marmaduke Harris and his gang have
finished Oliver. The country will be turned so topsy-turvy that there
will be no nice inquiry into bygones, and at any rate I can keep out of
London."

"Yes, it will be wise to do that," the other said, since that little
affair when the mercer and his wife in Cheap were found with their
throats cut, and you--"

"Fire and furies! John Marlow, do you want three inches of steel in your
ribs?"

"By no means!" the other answered. "You have become marvelously
straightlaced all at once. As you know, I have been concerned in as many
affairs as you have. Aha! I have had a merry time of it!"

"And may again," the other said. "Noll once dead, there will be good
times for us again. It is a pity that you and I were too well known to
have a hand in the job. Dost think there is any chance of a failure?"

"None," the other replied. "It is in good hands. Black Harry has bribed
a cook wench, who will open the back door. They say he was to return to
London this week, and if so Sunday is fixed for the affair. Five days
yet, and say another week for the news to get here. In a fortnight we
will be on our way to England. There, I am thirsty, and we left the
bottle in the next room. We had a late night of it with the boys there."

During this conversation, to which Harry listened breathlessly, he had
heard the tramp of feet going upstairs, and just as they finished
speaking these had descended again. A moment later the door between the
two rooms opened, and a man in the faded finery of a Royalist gentleman
entered.

"Fires and furies!" he exclaimed. "Whom have we here? Marlow, here is
an eavesdropper or a thief. We will slit his weasand. Aha!" he said,
gazing fixedly at Harry, "you are Colonel Furness. I know you. You had
me flogged the day before Worcester, for helping myself to an old
woman's purse. It is my turn now."

Joined by his fellow ruffian he fell upon Harry, but they were no match
for the Royalist colonel. After a few rapid thrusts and parries he ran
his first assailant through the body and cut down the man called Marlow,
with a sweeping blow which nearly cleft his head asunder.

Scarcely was the conflict ended when the door opened, and the old gypsy
entered. She started at seeing the bodies of the two ruffians.

"I have been attacked," Harry said briefly, "and have defended myself."

"It is no business of mine," the old woman remarked. "When I have guided
you out I will come back again. It's strange if there's not something
worth picking up. Now, pull your hat well over your eyes and follow me."

Closing and locking the door again, she led the way downstairs.

"Do not walk so straight and stiff," she said. "Slouch your shoulders,
and stoop your head. Now."

Harry sallied out into the lane, keeping by the side of his guide, with
his head bent forward, and his eyes on the ground, walking, as far as he
could, with a listless gait. The old woman continued to chatter to him
in Romaic. There were many people about in the lane, but none paid any
heed to them. Harry did not look up, but turned with his guide down
several lanes, until they at length emerged on the quays. Saying she
would call next day at his hotel for the reward he had promised her, she
left him, and Harry, with his head full of the plot against Cromwell's
life, crossed at once to the vessels by the quay.

"Is any ship sailing for the Thames to-day?" he asked.

"Yes," the sailor said. "The Mary Anne is just hoisting her anchor now,
out there in midstream. You will be but just in time, for the anchor's
under her foot."

Harry sprang into a boat and told the waterman to row to the ship. The
latter stared in astonishment at the authoritative manner in which this
gypsy addressed him, but Harry thrust his hand into his pocket, and
showed him some silver.

"Quick, man," he said, "for she is moving. You will have double fare to
put me on board."

The man pulled vigorously, and they were soon alongside the brig.

"Halloo! what now?" the captain said, looking over the side.

"I want a passage to England, and will pay you your own price."

"You haven't been killing any one, have you?" the captain asked. "I don't
want to have trouble when I come back here, for carrying off
malefactors."

"No, indeed," Harry said, as he lightly leaped on the deck. "I am Sir
Harry Furness, though I may not look it, and am bound to England on
urgent business. It is all right, my good fellow, and here is earnest
money for my passage," and he placed two pieces of gold in the captain's
hand.

"That will do," the captain said. "I will take you."

Harry went to the side.

"Here, my man, is your money, and a crown piece beside. Go to the Hotel
des Etoiles and ask for the English officer who is there lying sick.
Tell him Colonel Furness has been forced to leave for England at a
moment's notice, but will be back by the first ship."

The man nodded, and rowed back to shore as the Mary Anne, with her sails
hoisted, ran down the river.

Never did a voyage appear longer to an anxious passenger than did that
of the Mary Anne to England. The winds were light and baffling, and at
times the Mary Anne scarce moved through the water. Harry had no love
for Cromwell. Upon the contrary, he regarded him as the deadliest enemy
of the king, and moreover personally hated him for the cruel massacre of
Drogheda. In battle he would have gladly slain him, but he was
determined to save him from assassination. He felt the man to be a great
Englishman, and knew that it was greatly due to his counsels that so
little English blood had been shed upon the scaffold. Most of all, he
thought that his assassination would injure the royal cause. The time
was not yet ripe for a restoration. England had shown but lately that
there existed no enthusiasm for the royal cause. At Cromwell's death the
chief power would fall into the hands of fanatics more dangerous and
more violent than he. His murder would be used as a weapon for a
wholesale persecution of the Royalists throughout the land, and would
create such a prejudice against them that the inevitable reaction in
favor of royalty would be retarded for years. Full of these thoughts,
Harry fretted and fumed over the slow progress of the Mary Anne. Late on
Saturday night she entered the mouth of the Thames, and anchored until
the tide turned. Before daybreak she was on her way, and bore up on the
tide as far as Gravesend, when she had again to anchor. Harry obtained a
boat and was rowed to shore. In his present appearance, he did not like
to go to one of the principal inns for a horse, but entering a small one
on the outskirts of the place, asked the landlord if he could procure
him a horse.

"I am not what I seem," he said, in answer to his host's look of
surprise. "But I have urgent need to get to London this evening. I will
pay well for the horse, and will leave this ring with you as a
guarantee for his safe return."

"I have not a horse myself," the landlord said, with more respect than
he had at first shown; "but I might get one from my neighbor Harry
Fletcher, the butcher. Are you willing to pay a guinea for his use?
Fletcher will drive you himself."

Harry agreed to the sum, and a quarter of an hour later the man, with a
light horse and cart, came to the door.

"You are a strange-looking carle," he said, "to be riding on a Sunday in
haste; I scarce like being seen with thee."

"I have landed but an hour ago," Harry said, "and can buy no clothes
to-day; but if you or mine host here, who is nearer my size, have a
decent suit which you can sell me, I will pay you double the sum it
cost."

The landlord at once agreed to the terms, and five minutes later Harry,
clad in the sober garb of a decent tradesman, mounted the cart. The
horse was not a fast one, and the roads were bad. It was nigh six
o'clock before they reached London. Paying Fletcher the sum agreed upon,
Harry walked rapidly westward. Cromwell was abiding in a house in Pall
Mall. Upon Harry arriving there he was asked his business.

"The general is ill," the servant said, "and can see no one."

"I must see him," Harry urged. "It is a matter of the extremest
importance."

"See him you cannot," the man repeated, "and it were waste of words to
talk further on the matter. Dost think that, even were he well, the
general, with all the affairs of the Commonwealth on his shoulders, has
time to see every gossiping citizen who would have speech with him?"

Harry slipped a gold piece into the man's hand.

"It is useless," the man said. "The general is, as I truly told thee,
ill."

Harry stood in despair, "Could you gain me speech with the general's
wife?"

"Ay," the man said. "I might do that. What name shall say?"

"She would not know my name. Merely say that one wishes to speak to her
on a matter nearly touching the safety of the general."

"Hadst thou said that at once," the man grumbled, "I might have admitted
you before. There are many rumors of plots on the part of the malignants
against the life of the general. I will take your message to Madam
Cromwell, and she can deal with it as she will."

The man was absent for a few minutes. Then he returned with an officer.

"Can you tell me," the latter asked, "what you have to reveal?"

"No," Harry replied, "I must speak with the general himself."

"Beware," the officer said sternly, "that you trifle not. The general is
sick, and has many things on his mind; 'twill be ill for you if you
disturb him without cause."

"The cause is sufficient," Harry said. "I would see him in person."

Without a word the officer turned and led the way to a room upstairs,
where Cromwell was sitting at a table, His wife was near him. A Bible
lay open before him. Cromwell looked steadily at Harry.

"I hear that you have a matter of importance to tell me, young man, and
one touching my safety. I know that there are many who thirst for my
blood. But I am in the hands of the Lord, who has so far watched over
His servant. If there be truth in what you have to tell you will be
rewarded."

"I seek for no reward," Harry said. "I have gained knowledge of a plot
against your life. Do you wish that I should speak in the presence of
this officer?"

"Assuredly," the general said.

"Briefly, then, I have arrived from Hamburg but now to give you warning
of a matter which came to my ears. I overheard, how it matters not, a
conversation between two rascals who gave themselves out as Royalists,
but who were indeed rather escaped criminals, to the effect that men had
gone over thence to England with the intention of killing you. The plot
was to come off to-night, Whether there be any change in the
arrangements or no I cannot say, but the matter was, as they said, fixed
for to-night. One of the women servants has been bribed to open the back
entrance and to admit them there, More than this I know not."

"You speak, sir, as one beyond your station," Cromwell said; "and
methinks I know both your face and figure, which are not easily
forgotten when once seen."

"It matters not who I am," Harry replied, "so that the news I bring be
true. I am no friend of yours, but a servant of King Charles. Though I
would withstand you to the death in the field, I would not that a life
like yours should be cut short by assassination; or that the royal cause
should be sullied by such a deed, the dishonor of which, though planned
and carried out by a small band of desperate partisans, would yet, in
the eyes of the world, fall upon all who followed King Charles."

"You are bold, sir," Cromwell said. "But I wonder not, for I know you
now. We have met, so far as I know, but once before. That was after
Drogheda, where you defended the church, and where I spared your life at
the intercession of my chaplain. I heard of you afterward as having, by
a desperate enterprise, escaped, and afterward captured a ship with
prisoners; and as having inflicted heavy loss and damage upon the
soldiers of Parliament. You fought at Dunbar and Worcester, and, if I
mistake not, incurred the enmity of the Earl of Argyll."

"I am Sir Harry Furness," Harry said calmly; "his majesty having been
pleased to bestow upon me the honor of knighthood. Nor are you mistaken
touching the other matters, since you yourself agreed at the lonely
house on the moor to hand me over to Colonel Campbell, as his price for
betraying the post I commanded. That matter, as you may remember, turned
out otherwise than had been expected. I am not ashamed of my name, nor
have I any fear of its being known to you. I have come over to do you
service, and fear not harm at your hands when on such business."

"Why then did you not tell me at once?" Cromwell asked.

"Simply because I seek no favor at your hands. I would not that you
should think that Harry Furness sought to reconcile himself with the
Commons, by giving notice of a plot against your life. I am intending to
start for Virginia and settle there, and would not stoop to sue for
amnesty, though I should never see Furness Hall or England again."

Harry spoke in a tone of haughty frankness, which carried conviction
with it.

"I doubt you not," Cromwell said. "You have been a bitter foe to the
Commons, Colonel Furness, but it is not of men like you that we need be
afraid. You meet us fairly in the field, and fight us loyally and
honorably. It is the tricksters, the double-dealers, and the traitors,
the men who profess to be on our side but who burrow in the dark against
us, who trouble our peace. In this matter I am greatly beholden to you.
Now that you have given us warning of the plot, it will be met if
attempted. But should these men's hearts fail them, or for any other
cause the attempt be laid aside, I shall be none the less indebted to
you. I trust, Colonel Furness, that you will not go to the plantations.
England needs honest men here. There is a great work yet to be done
before happiness and quiet are restored; and we need all wise and good
men in the counsels of the state. Be assured that you are free to return
and dwell with the Cavalier, your father, at your pleasure. He drew
aside from the strife when he saw that the cause he fought for was
hopeless, and none have interfered with him. Charles will, methinks,
fight no more in England. His cause is lost, and wise men will adapt
themselves to the circumstances. Let me know where you lodge to-night.
You will hear further from me to-morrow."




 

REST AT LAST.


Harry slept at an inn in Westminster, and the next morning on going down
to his breakfast, he found people much excited, a rumor having gone
about that an attack had been made upon Cromwell's house during the
night, and that several had been killed, but no harm done to the
general. An hour afterward a messenger brought word that General
Cromwell wished to see Colonel Furness. After his breakfast Harry had at
once gone out and purchased clothes suitable to a country gentleman; in
these he proceeded to the general, and was at once shown up to his room.

"Your news was trustworthy, Colonel Furness, and Oliver Cromwell owes
his life to you. Soon after midnight one of the serving wenches opened
the back door, and eight men entered. Had no watch been set, they would
doubtless have reached my room unobserved, by the staircase which leads
from that part of the house. As it was, I had a guard in waiting, and
when the men were fairly inside they fell upon them. The soldiers were
too quick with them, being hot at the plot which was intended against my
life, and all were killed, together with the wench who admitted them,
who was stabbed by one of the men at the first alarm, thinking doubtless
she had betrayed them. I hear that none of them have the air of
gentlemen, but are clearly broken men and vagabonds. The haste of my
soldiers has prevented me from getting any clew as to those who set them
on, but I am sure that no English gentleman, even although devoted to
the cause of Charles Stuart, would so plot against my life. And now,
sir, I thank you heartily for the great service you have rendered me. My
life is, I think, precious to England, where I hope to do some good work
before I die. I say only in return that henceforth you may come and go
as you list; and I hope yet that you will sit by me in Parliament, and
aid me to set things in England in order. Do not take this, sir, as in
any way a recompense for saving my life. The war is over; a few of those
who had troubled, and would always trouble the peace of England, have
been executed. Against the rest we bear no malice. They are free to
return to their homes and occupations as they list, and so long as they
obey the laws, and abstain from fresh troubles and plots, none will
molest them. But, sir, in order that no molestation or vexation may
occur to you, here is a free pass, signed by General Fairfax and two of
the commissioners, saying that you are at liberty to go or come and to
stay where you please, without hindrance or molestation from any."

Harry took the document, bowed, and withdrew.

"It is a thousand pities," he said to himself, "that his majesty the
king has not somewhat of this man's quality. This is a strong man, and a
true. He may have his faults--ay, he has them--he is ambitions, he is
far more fanatical for his religion than was Charles I. for his. He is
far more absolute, far more domineering than was King Charles. Were he
made king to-morrow, as I hear he is like enough to be, he would trample
upon the Parliament and despise its will infinitely more than any
English king would ever have dared to do. But for all that he is a great
man, honest, sincere, and, above all, to be trusted. Who can say that
for the Stuarts?"

Upon the day of his arrival Harry had written to Jacob telling him the
cause of his sudden departure, and promising to return by the first
ship, He hesitated now whether he should sail at once, or go down to see
his father, but he determined that it would be best, at any rate in the
first place, to return to Hamburg and look after his companion, and then
to come over to see his father, before carrying out his intention of
proceeding to Virginia. A ship would, he found, be sailing in three
days, and he wrote to his father telling him that he had been in London
for a day or two, but was forced by the illness of Jacob to return at
once; but that upon his friend's recovery he would come back to Abingdon
for a short time before leaving. He arrived at Hamburg without
adventure. On reaching the hotel he was informed that Jacob was
delirious, and that his life was despaired of. The rascally boatman
could not have given the message with which he had been charged, since
Jacob, upon the day after he was first missed, had risen from his bed,
and insisted on going in search of him. He had, after many inquiries,
learned that one answering to his description had taken part in a fray
in a drinking-house--interfering to protect a Bohemian singer from
insult. Beyond this nothing could be heard of him. He had not been seen
in the fray in the street, when several of the rioters had been captured
and carried off by the watch, and some supposed that he might have left
the place at the back, in which case it was feared that he might have
been fallen upon and assassinated by the ruffians in the low quarter
lying behind the drinking hall. Jacob had worked himself into a state of
high fever by his anxiety, and upon returning to the hotel had become so
violent that they were forced to restrain him. He had been bled and
blistered, but had remained for a fortnight in a state of violent fever
and delirium. This had now somewhat abated, but he was in such a weak
state that the doctors feared the worst.

The return of Harry did more for him than all the doctors of Hamburg. He
seemed at once to recognize his voice, and the pressure of his hand
soothed and calmed him. He presently fell into a deep sleep, in which he
lay for twelve hours, and on opening his eyes at once recognized his
friend. His recovery now was rapid, and in a week he was able to sit up.

One morning the servant told Harry that a gentleman wished to speak to
him, and a moment after his father entered. With a cry of delight father
and son flew into each other's arms. It was four years since they had
met, and both were altered much. The colonel had aged greatly, while
Harry had grown into a broad and powerful man.

"My dear father, this is an unexpected pleasure indeed," Harry said,
when the first burst of delight was over. "Did you not get my letter
from London, saying that I hoped shortly to be with you?"

"From London!" the colonel exclaimed, astonished. "No, indeed; I have
received no letter save that which your boy brought me. We started a
week later for Southampton, where we were detained nigh ten days for a
ship."

"And who is the _we_, father?" Harry asked anxiously.

"Ah," the old man said, "now you are in a hurry to know. Who should it
be but Master Rippinghall and a certain young lady?"

"Oh, father, has Lucy really come?"

"Assuredly she has," Colonel Furness said, "and is now waiting in a
private room below with her brother, for Sir Harry. I have not
congratulated you yet, my boy, on your new dignity."

"And you really consent to my marriage, sir?"

"I don't see that I could help it," the colonel said, "since you had
set your mind on it, especially as when I came to inquire I found the
young lady was willing to go to Virginia. But we must talk of that anon.
Yes, Harry, you have my full consent. The young lady is not quite of the
rank of life I should have chosen for you; but ranks and classes are all
topsy-turvy in England at present, and when we are ruled over by a
brewer, it would be nice indeed to refuse to take a wool-stapler's
sister for wife. But seriously, Harry, I am well contented. I knew
little of the young lady except by common report, which spoke of her as
the sweetest and kindest damsel in Abingdon. But now I have seen her, I
wonder not at your choice. During the fortnight we have been together I
have watched her closely, and I find in her a rare combination of
gentleness and firmness. You have won her heart, Harry, though how she
can have kept thee in mind all this time is more than I can tell. Her
brother tells me that he placed no pressure upon her either for or
against, though he desired much for your sake, and from the love he bore
you, that she should accept of your suit. Now you had better go down,
and learn from her own lips how it stands with her."

It need not to describe the meeting between Harry and his old friends.
Herbert was warm and cordial as of old. Lucy was but little changed
since Harry had seen her four years before, save that she was more fair
and womanly.

"Your letter gave me," Herbert said, "a mixed feeling of pleasure and
pain. I knew that my little sister has always looked upon you as a hero
of romance, and though I knew not that as a woman her heart still turned
to you, yet she refused so sharply and shrewishly all the suitors who
came to her, that I suspected that her thoughts of you were more than a
mere child's fancy. When your letter came I laid no pressure upon her,
just as in other cases I have held aloof, and indeed have gained some
ill-will at the hands of old friends because I would not, as her
brother, and the head of the family, lay stress upon her. I read your
letter to her, and she at first said she was ready to obey my wishes in
the matter, and to go with you to Virginia if I bade her. I said that in
such a matter it was her will and not mine which I wished to consult,
and thus pressed into a corner, she owned that she would gladly go with
you."

"Harry," the girl said, "for my tongue is not as yet used to your new
title, under other circumstances I should have needed to be wooed and
won like other girls. But seeing how strangely you are placed, and that
you were about to start across the sea, to be absent perhaps for many
years, I felt that it would not be worthy either of me or you were I to
affect a maiden coyness and so to throw difficulties in your way. I feel
the honor of the offer you have made me. That you should for so many
years have been absent and seen the grand ladies of the court, and have
yet thought of your little playfellow, shows that your heart is as true
and good as I of old thought it to be, and I need feel no shame in
acknowledging that I have ever thought of you with affection."

For the next few days there was much argument over the project of going
to Virginia. Herbert, when he heard what had happened in London, joined
his entreaties to those of Sir Henry, asserting that he had only
consented to Lucy's going to so outlandish a place in the belief that
there was no help for it, and that he did not think it fair for Harry to
take her to such a life when he could stay comfortably at home. Sir
Henry did not say much, but Harry could see how ardently he longed for
him to remain. As for Lucy, she stood neutral, saying that assuredly
she did not wish to go to Virginia, but that, upon the other hand, she
should feel that her consent had been obtained under false pretenses,
and that she had been defrauded of the enjoyment of a proper and regular
courtship, did it prove that Harry might have come home and sought her
hand in regular form. Harry's reluctance to remain arose principally
from the fact that he had gained permission to do so by an act of
personal service which he had done the king's great enemy. Had he been
included in a general amnesty he would gladly have accepted it. However,
his resolution gave way under the arguments of Herbert, who urged upon
him that he had no right, on a mere point of punctilio, to leave his
father in his old age, and to take Lucy from her country and friends to
a life of hardship in the plantations of Virginia. At last he yielded.
Then a difficulty arose with Lucy, who would fain have returned to
Abingdon with her brother, and urged she should there have time given
her to be married in regular fashion. This Harry would by no means
consent to, and as both Sir Henry and Herbert saw no occasion for the
delay, they were married a fortnight later at the Protestant church at
Hamburg, Jacob, who was by this time perfectly restored to health,
acting as his best man.

One of the first steps which Harry took after his return to Hamburg was
to inquire about the gypsy maid who had done him such service. She was
still singing at the drinking-house. Harry went down there in the
daytime and gave one of the drawers a crown to tell her quietly that the
Englishman she knew would fain see her, and would wait for her at a spot
he named on the walk by the river bank, between ten and twelve the next
day. Here, accompanied by Lucy, who, having heard of the service which
the girl had rendered him, fully entered into his anxiety to befriend
her, he awaited her the next day. She came punctual to the appointment,
but in great fear that the old gypsy would discover her absence. Upon
Harry telling her that Lucy, who was about to become his wife, would
willingly take her to England and receive her as a companion until such
time as some opportunity for furthering her way in life might appear,
Zita accepted the proposal with tears of joy. She abhorred the life she
was forced to lead, and it was only after many beatings and much
ill-usage from the gypsies that she consented to it, and it made her
life the harder, inasmuch as she knew that she had not been born to such
a fate, but had been stolen as a child.

"What could have been their motive in carrying you away?" Lucy asked.

"I believe," the girl said, "from what they have told me, that I was
taken in revenge. My father had charged one of the gypsies with theft,
and the man having been hung, the others, to avenge themselves, carried
me off."

"But why did you not, when you grew old enough, tell your story to the
magistrates, and appeal to them for assistance?"

"Alas!" the girl said, "what proofs have I for my tale? Moreover, even
were I believed, and taken from the gypsies, what was there for me to
do, save to beg in the streets for charity?"

They now arranged with her the manner of her flight. She was afraid to
meet them again lest her footsteps should be traced, for she was sure
that the gypsies would carry her away to some other town if they had the
least suspicion that she had made friends with any capable of taking her
part, as the whole party lived in idleness upon the money she gained by
singing. It was arranged, therefore, that the night before they were to
depart Harry should appear in the singing hall, and should take his
place near the door. She should let him know that she perceived him by
passing her hand twice across her forehead. When the performance was
over she should, instead of leaving as usual by the back way, slip down
the steps, and mingle with those leaving the hall. Outside the door she
would find Harry, who would take her to the hotel, where dresses would
be provided for her. There she should stop the night, and go on board
ship with them in the morning.

These arrangements were all carried out, and four days after the wedding
of Harry and Lucy the party, with Zita, sailed for England. Had the
tenantry on the Furness estate known of the home-coming of their young
master and his bride, they would have given him a grand reception; but
Harry and his father both agreed that this had better not be, for that
it was as well to call no public attention to his return, even though he
had received Cromwell's permission.

After all his adventures, Sir Harry Furness dwelt quietly and happily
with his father. In the following years the English fleet fought many
hard battles with the Dutch, and the Parliament, in order to obtain
money, confiscated the property of most of those Cavaliers who had now
returned under the Act of Amnesty. Steps were taken against Sir Henry
Furness, but as he had taken no part in the troubles after the close of
the first civil war, Cromwell, on receiving an application from him,
peremptorily quashed the proceedings.

On April 20, 1653, Cromwell went down to the House with a body of
troops, and expelled the Parliament, who were in the act of passing a
bill for their own dissolution, and a new representation. He thus proved
himself as tyrannous and despotic as any sovereign could have been. A
new Parliament was summoned, but instead of its members being elected in
accordance with the customs of England, they were selected and
nominated by Cromwell himself. The history of England contains no
instance of such a defiance of the constitutional rights of the people.
But although he had grasped power arbitrarily and by force, Cromwell
used it well and wisely, and many wise laws and great social reforms
were passed by the Parliament under his orders. Still the fanatical
party were in the majority in this body, and as Cromwell saw that these
persons would push matters further than he wished, he made an
arrangement with the minority, who resigned their seats, thereby leaving
an insufficient number in the House to transact business. Cromwell
accepted their resignation, and the Parliament then ceased to exist.

Four days later, on the 16th of December, Cromwell assumed the state and
title of Lord Protector of the Commonwealth. For the next five years he
governed England wisely and well. The Parliament was assembled, but as
its proceedings were not in accordance with his wishes, he dissolved it,
and for the most part governed England by his own absolute will. That it
was a strong will and a wise cannot be questioned, but that a rising,
which originally began because the king would not yield to the absolute
will of Parliament, should have ended in a despotism, in which the chief
of the king's opponents should have ruled altogether without
Parliaments, is strange indeed. It is singular to find that those who
make most talk about the liberties of Englishmen should regard as their
hero and champion the man who trod all the constitutional rights of
Englishmen under foot. But if a despot, Cromwell was a wise and firm
one, and his rule was greatly for the good of the country. Above all, he
brought the name of England into the highest honor abroad, and made it
respected throughout Europe. Would that among all Englishmen of the
present day there existed the same feeling of patriotism, the same
desire for the honor and credit of their country, as dwelt in the breast
of Oliver Cromwell.

On August 30, 1658, Cromwell died, and his son Richard succeeded him.
The Parliament and the army soon fell out, and the army, coming down in
force, dissolved Parliament, and Richard Cromwell ceased at once to have
any power. The army called together forty-two of the old members of the
Long Parliament, of extreme republican views, but these had no sooner
met than they broke into divisions, and England was wholly without a
government. So matters went on for some time, until General Monk, with
the army of the north, came up to London. He had for weeks been in
communication with the king. For a time he was uncertain of the course
he should take, but after awhile he found that the feeling of London was
wholly averse to the Parliament, and so resolved to take the lead in a
restoration. A Parliament was summoned, and upon the day after its
assembling Monk presented to them a document from King Charles,
promising to observe the constitution, granting full liberty of
conscience, and an amnesty for past offenses. Parliament at once
declared in favor of the ancient laws of the kingdom, the government to
be by King, Lords and Commons; and on May 8, 1660, Charles II. was
proclaimed king, and on the 30th entered London in triumph.

Sir Harry Furness sat in the Parliament which recalled the king, and in
many subsequent ones. His father came to London to see the royal entry,
and both were most kindly received by the king, who expressed a warm
hope that he should often see them at court. This, however, was not to
be. The court of King Charles offered no attractions to pure-minded and
honorable men. Sir Henry came no more to London, but lived quietly and
happily to the end of a long life at Furness Hall, rejoicing much over
the happiness of his son, and in the society of his daughter-in-law and
her children. Herbert Rippinghall sat in Parliament for Abingdon. Except
when obliged by his duties as a member to be in London, Sir Harry
Furness lived quietly at Furness Hall, taking much interest in country
matters. Twenty-eight years later James II fled from England, and
William of Orange mounted the throne. At this time Sir Harry Furness was
sixty-one, and he lived many years to see the freedom and rights for
which Englishmen had so hotly struggled and fought now enjoyed by them
in all their fullness.

A few words as to the other personages of this story. Jacob, three years
after Harry's return to England, married the Spanish girl Zita, and
settled down in a pretty house called the Dower House, on the Furness
property, which, together with a large farm attached to it, Sir Henry
Furness settled upon him, as a token of his affection and gratitude to
him for the faithful services he had rendered to his son.

William Long was made bailiff of the estate, and Mike remained the
attached and faithful body-servant of Sir Harry, until he, ten years
later, married the daughter and heiress of a tradesman in Abingdon, and
became a leading citizen of that town.

Although Harry was not of a revengeful disposition, he rejoiced
exceedingly when he heard, two or three months after the king's
restoration, of the execution of that doubly-dyed traitor, the Earl of
Argyll.

THE END.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Friends, though divided, by G. A. Henty

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRIENDS, THOUGH DIVIDED ***

***** This file should be named 11565.txt or 11565.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/5/6/11565/

Produced by Ted Garvin, Dave Morgan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:


EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:



The extraordinary interest which this book has excited has induced
the publisher to issue a new and revised edition at a reduced price,
believing that, as it is the first attempt at a prehistoric novel, it
will have a wide reading. The subject, the characters and the period are
here for the first time introduced into fiction.

The scenes are laid in the Tertiary Age when, according to the Darwinian
Theory, men were emerging from the Ape, and they portray the supposed
exploits of our ancestors at that stage of development. The author has
aimed to exhibit the features of the time—climate, foliage, animals,
etc.—as understood by Geologists and Biologists, and to be scientifically
accurate, with no more variations in proportion than are usual in
historic fiction.

If Evolution is the true theory of man’s origin there is a long period
of forgotten history, covering thousands of centuries, during which men
lived and fought and learned, and this book seeks to revivify it and
make it realizable. In this period nearly all the arts and industries
were started, and the author suggests their crude origin in a variety
of episodes. The origin of arms, building, religion and government, the
first use of fire and clothing and the primitive form of many social and
business problems are indicated in the course of a simple story.

In addition to its valuable scientific hints, the work is rich in
practical wisdom. It is also spiced throughout with a vein of quiet
humor which provokes mirth and makes it highly entertaining as well as
instructive.

The illustrations by H. R. Heaton, an artist of national reputation, are
believed to be the best work of his genius.


 


[Illustration]

About ninety years after the fight between the Monkeys and Snakes on
Cocoanut Hill, which was five hundred thousand years before our era, and
near the end of the Tertiary Age, Sosee was sitting on a limb sucking a
mango, when Koree came up in great consternation.

“The fat baboon, from across the swamp,” he said, “has carried off Orlee
while her mother was hunting berries in the bushes.”

“If you love me, Koree,” replied Sosee, uttering a wild scream, “you will
fetch her back, and bring me the tail of the baboon before night.”

Sosee, who spoke these words, was a comely girl of twelve years, one of
the new race which had recently separated from the Apes, and would no
longer recognize them as equals. There was a hostility between the Apes
and these upstarts, and frequent incursions were made from the territory
of one on that of the other.

The Apes had mostly retreated to the swamps and forests beyond, while
the new race were occupying the region about Cocoanut Hill, which their
ancestors of two generations before had taken, after many conflicts, from
the Apes, and from which they had driven the savage beasts. Here the
parents of Sosee were living, and here Sosee had grown to womanhood.

The Cocoanut Hill region was a large tract, in what is now Southern
France, stretching from Alligator Swamp toward the mountains in the
distance. This section was plentifully covered with fruit trees—mangos,
palms, figs and limes; the under brush furnished berries and succulent
herbs; the waters of the swamp, which bordered this land, abounded in
fish, frogs, turtles, snakes and alligators; while great flocks of
ducks, geese and other water fowl frequented it at seasons. The forests
abounded in Uri, Woolly Oxen, Musk-Deer and other game. This abundance of
vegetable and animal life supplied food for the Ammi, as the new race was
called, and they would have lived in comfort but for the attacks of the
Apes beyond the water, who, keeping an envious eye on these fruits, often
came over the Swamp for food.

Shortly before the event of which we speak, some apes in one of these
predatory incursions, were met by a larger number of the Ammi, when
several of the former were killed, and one, a small boy, taken prisoner.
The Ammi, expecting the Apes to attempt reprisals for this, kept a watch
at night, while during the day they guarded their children.

Several times on the day mentioned signs of approaching Apes had been
seen. Gimbo, the grandfather of Sosee, who still persisted in walking on
four feet, (although the Ammi generally had begun to walk upright), said
he could scent the trail of the Apes, and had noticed the marks of one
walking on four feet. But Gimbo was deemed a garrulous old man, somewhat
unreliable, who claimed exceptional wisdom about the animals lower than
men, so that little attention was given to his warning.

The mother of Orlee, however, had observed a sudden starting up of geese
from the swamp; but this also raised little suspicion, as they might
have been startled by a fox. Later, however, her keen sense of hearing
detected successive splashings in the water, as if made by plunging
alligators or turtles on the approach of an enemy. She was, accordingly,
slow to leave the spot where her child was playing—a girl of three years,
the sister of Sosee.

Gaining confidence, however, with the restored silence of the swamp,
she took a club with which she usually warded off reptiles when hunting
berries, or killed them when requiring them for food; and, armed in this
way, she waded into the swamp, still keeping, however, in sight of her
child.

As the berries were plentiful, she had soon eaten all she wanted, making
thereof her morning meal, when she was attracted by some luscious ones
farther in the swamp, which she hurried to get for the child. Having
filled her hands she was next startled by a huge snake of the Boa
species, which swung suddenly down from a tree, like a great vine and
sought to fasten its coils around her.

[Illustration: SOSEE’S MOTHER ENCOUNTERS THE SNAKE.]

Dropping the berries and uttering a wild scream, she seized the serpent,
and, sinking her nails and teeth in its flesh, began a fatal struggle
with it. The snake, which had fastened one coil about her leg, swung
round violently with the intention of encircling her waist. Her screams
startled the child, which began crying, and the two noises attracted the
attention of Koree, the lover of Sosee, who was sporting in a puddle near
by.

Koree started to the rescue of the woman, but, in the tangled underbrush
could not find her; but, instead, he ran against a gigantic ape, which
had also been startled by the cries, and, in his fright, was running
about in confusion. This ape gave Koree a powerful blow with his fist,
and then ran out of the swamp to where the child was playing. Seizing the
child he next ran with it into the bushes and was out of sight.

Too weak, or too frightened, to follow, Koree now hurried back to give
the alarm, when he encountered Sosee on the tree, as we have related.
Sosee’s screams and calls to Koree to rescue the child roused some men
near by, who now all rushed for the swamp.

As they approached they saw the mother of the child emerging from the
bushes carrying the huge snake in triumph about her neck, part of which
was hanging down in long folds, pending from her arms. Never was a woman
prouder over a necklace of diamonds or pearls. Her bloody face and arms
added to the terror inspired by her Amazonian air, as, with a proud step,
she advanced to the men and threw down her trophy.

Disburdened of her load, and sinking from the stimulant of battle, she
now became faint, through loss of blood, and was about to drop to the
ground; for, in the struggle with the serpent, she had been severely
bitten and wrenched, so that her own blood was mingled with that of the
reptile on her body.

As she was about to faint away, however, she observed that her child was
gone, when all the excitement returned which had attended her in battle,
and, on hearing of its capture, she sent up a wail which echoed through
the forest, and flew into a rage that terrified the bystanders.




 


[Illustration]

The events related in the preceding chapter occurred, as we have said,
about ninety years after the fight between the Monkeys and Snakes on
Cocoanut Hill. As the time of the Ammi is reckoned from this fight, we
shall go back, for awhile, to the affairs which immediately preceded it.

The Apes of all kinds had, till then, been roving promiscuously over the
country along with wild beasts of every description. The forests being
free to all, and likewise the swamps, there was a scene like that of the
jungles of Central Africa to-day. Land and water teemed with life, and
were animated with struggles for the food of the region. Gigantic lions,
tigers, woolly rhinoceroses, mastodons, cave-bears and other savage
beasts sported in their favorite element. Serpents were particularly
abundant, especially in the great Alligator Swamp, from which they
emerged to the high country to catch rabbits and other game. The Apes,
which were mostly vegetarians, did not at first interfere with the more
savage beasts hunting in these forests; so that there was an endless
variety of animals in the region of which we speak.

The Apes at this time lived mostly on trees, especially at night. This
was necessary on account of the more savage beasts which roamed over
the ground. When game became scarce the tigers and some other animals
attacked the Apes, and often killed them. The weaker animals which could
not climb the trees were generally in danger of becoming the prey of the
stronger ones.

This arboreal life became in time irksome to the Apes, many of whom
had made some progress in methods of living and hunting. These were,
accordingly, anxious to acquire a right to the ground, and security in
its possession. They had become so large that a fall from a tree was a
serious matter. Nor was a tree always convenient to climb when they were
in danger.

They could not, however, come to the ground while so many savage beasts
occupied it. A sleeping ape was liable to suffer death if met by a tiger,
especially in recent years when many fights occurred between the two. The
Apes, accordingly, conceived the project of ridding the country of the
more dangerous animals.

There were two principal species of Apes at this time, the Ammi, who
afterwards became known as men, and the Lali, who were the enemies of the
Ammi on the other side of the swamp; and, though there had come to be
marked differences between the two, (of which we shall presently speak,)
they were, at this time, both living together as Apes (the Man-Apes
of Biology), and were alike interested in ridding the country of the
stronger beasts.

A council was, accordingly, called to take measures for their common
welfare. In this council they gave their respective views without those
formalities which now attend such gatherings. They spoke mainly in
gestures and growls, which constituted all there was of language then,
(articulate speech not having been developed beyond a few broken sounds).
One, Shamboo, believed to be the great-grandfather of Sosee, was the
acknowledged leader of the Apes, and he directed the deliberations of
this assembly. Speaking in the manner indicated, this Ape harangued the
multitude to the following effect:

“Tailed Apes, upright Apes, Baboons and Monkeys of low degree: I am tired
living on trees. I am getting too old and fat to climb, and cannot go up
in the air every time I want to sleep. My eyes are bad, and can’t tell a
rotten limb from a sound one. Only two days ago, while eating a cocoanut,
the limb broke on which I was sitting, and I fell to the ground, striking
a porcupine; and there has been a sick monkey ever since. Just before the
big rain I was chased up a tree by a hyena, when, before I got out of
reach, he seized my tail, already reduced to a stump, and I had to let
go of either the tree or my tail. I stuck to the tree, but to-day I am
a tailless Ape! Why should the ground be conceded to tigers and snakes?
The earth was made for monkeys. Our food is mostly on the ground, and it
is easier to walk on a level than up and down. We can run faster than
we can climb. We cannot fly, like the birds, and there is no easy way
for such big folks to get up a tree. But we dare not come to the ground.
If we do we must fight some brute. The tigers want the earth; and we
can’t afford to maintain perpetual war. I am, therefore, for peace, and
so favor killing off our enemies. If the forces of the trees will but
combine, dropping their disputes about the milk that is in the cocoanut,
they can conquer the forces of the earth. Resolve, then, monkeys all, to
make a fight for the land, and not be so often found up a stump. True
to your ape-hood, join me in an oath to drive out the ground-beasts.
Everything in this valley will then be ours. We shall have the plants
and berries, and frogs, and little fishes. We can then lie down to sleep
without falling off, and run about without getting tired. Whoever loves
monkeykind will, therefore, follow my advice. Now, all of you who are
resolved to drive out the beasts which claim this land, swear with me by
scratching your top rib while I crack this butternut and eat the kernel.”

The eloquence of Shamboo gained the assembly to his proposition. Every
rib got a scratch, and the solemnity of the hour was felt in every
breast. An aged priest of the Mountain Apes bowed low his head, breathing
a blessing on the undertaking; and from that hour the savage beasts of
Cocoanut Hill were doomed.




 


[Illustration]

The plan of attack on the beasts was two-fold. One method was to
associate together and make a combined assault by two’s or more,
according to the strength of their antagonists. The other was to get on
trees and spring upon the enemy when asleep or at other disadvantage. In
this way they hoped to so worry the larger beasts that they would quit
the region of their own accord.

This coöperation was important as being the beginning of association
among Apes. By uniting in two’s and three’s for attack or defense they
learned to confederate, and so laid the foundations of society. Till
that time they had roamed the forests and jungles solitary, each one
hunting alone his food, like the tigers, and forming no lasting or
frequent attachments. They met the opposite sex casually at a spring
or in the fruit regions. They did not recognize their own children, or
care for them except for a few years after birth, until they could roam
for themselves. Only occasionally did they meet for a common purpose,
and then only for a little while. They were not gregarious, though they
sometimes met in large numbers where food was abundant, and became
slightly acquainted. They chattered or fought while together, and then
parted to see one another perhaps no more.

Having now, however, formed a League of the Apes, offensive and
defensive, these animals, who disputed with the tigers the right to be
called the lords of the land, soon became acquainted with one another,
and therefore learned to like each other better. They found that they
had many common interests, and there sprang up warm attachments between
them. Their mutual disagreements disappeared before their disagreements
with the tigers. They learned to help one another that they might destroy
a common enemy, founding their unity on their common hatred. Many
sentiments were, accordingly, developed, to which ape-hood had before
been a stranger. Hearts were touched where before there were thought to
be only stomachs, and a new sentiment—love—was awakened in the race; and
when they parted after a night’s watch, or fight, they often presented
one another with a cocoanut or bull-frog. Unselfishness gradually took
the place of unrestrained competition, and a monkey etiquette grew up and
became recognized. Some of the apes became noticeably polite, especially
to the opposite sex, and there was soon quite a little social intercourse
between them. They would go out by two’s and three’s for food or water,
as well as for a fight, and thus they learned to labor together, as well
as fight together.

Nor was this all. Having got together in a league, it was not easy to
separate them. They came together to stay, and they stayed to co-operate
in many measures besides their own defense. After their wars certain
industries sprang up, among which was the damming of part of the Swamp
(where it was entered by a stream), so as to form a lake, in which they
could with more convenience drink and wash. Having tasted the sweets
of association, they wished, in short, to remain in society; and when
subsequently the younger ones became restive, and tried to regain the
liberty of independent or single life, the older heads compelled them to
adhere to the social compact.

Scarcely had they formed their alliance for war, when they set out for
the enemy. Their chief foe was the tigers and snakes, because these were
most numerous, although there were some lions, pachyderms, bears, and
other savage beasts, of which also they meant to rid the country. One
proposed that they all start out together, saying that while they would
thus be fighting as a whole, the enemy, which would be fighting singly,
could be easily overcome. Shamboo opposed this plan, however, as likely
to attract too much attention, and, perhaps, to cause the tigers also to
confederate. “Let us,” he said, “indeed, fight each enemy singly; but it
does not require more than three apes to kill one tiger.”

They accordingly broke up into small bands, and started on a tiger
hunt. On the first day of the War of the Beasts, a body of three, led
by Shamboo, climbed a Yew tree near the Swamp, where a great tiger was
known to come to slake his thirst. It was agreed, or rather laid down by
Shamboo as the method of attack, that when the tiger should pass under
the tree, one of them, the youngest and strongest, should drop upon the
tiger’s back, and fasten his jaws in his neck, when the rest would follow
and dispatch their victim.

[Illustration: SHAMBOO’S RIDE.]

Scarcely had this been resolved upon, when the tiger appeared, marching
slowly toward their tree. He was carrying a sheep in his mouth, and his
great show of muscular strength and fierce expression seemed to despise
danger. The ape who had been chosen to drop on the tiger drew back in
fear, and told Shamboo to do that part himself.

No time was to be lost, and, before the words of the timid ape were
fully uttered, Shamboo dropped upon the tiger. His great weight crushed
the beast to the ground, and compelled it to let go of the sheep. The
tiger immediately got up, however, and, not knowing what to do, in his
embarrassment, started on a full run. Shamboo clung to his back, and away
they both went, like John Gilpin, dashing over hill and dale and through
jungle and forest. The deer fled at their approach, squirrels ran up the
trees, a flock of ducks started from a pool near by, and the flight of
birds and beasts from their path was like the stampede which precedes a
prairie fire. Shamboo’s teeth were fixed in the tiger’s neck, and his
feet like spurs were sunk in his sides.

So they ran, and the earth rapidly receded behind them. The other two
apes followed, but at a distance, so that the tiger and Shamboo were
practically alone, and must soon, it seemed, try their strength in single
combat. The tiger, however, was too scared to take an inventory of what
he was carrying, while Shamboo’s thoughts were divided equally between
how to hold on and how to let go. The tiger himself soon solved this
problem for Shamboo by running through a hole in a thicket which was too
small to admit both, so that Shamboo was knocked off. He fell into a
cluster of bushes, and the fall was so violent as to cause him to turn
several summersets, so that he did not know in which direction he had
been going. The tiger, lightened of his load, but not of his scare, kept
on, and was soon out of sight and out of this story.

Shamboo picked himself up and, looking round, spied the other two
apes coming slowly toward him. He limped back to them with an air of
disappointment, rather than of suffering, and, without uttering a word,
fell upon the younger ape, who had shown cowardice, and killed him for
his breach of military discipline in disobeying orders.

The fame of that ride and that fight remains to the time of this story,
though there are different versions of it among the Ammi and the Apes
beyond the Swamp.

And long subsequent to this time, when the descendants of these Apes got
to riding on the backs of horses and cattle, there was a legend ascribing
the origin of the uses of beasts of burden to this unwilling ride of
Shamboo; and in the mythology of the later Apes Shamboo became the god of
Domestication.




 


[Illustration]

In the course of the contest with the tigers, which lasted several years,
many improvements were made in the art of warfare, which afterwards
served the Apes in time of peace. After the experience of Shamboo and
others, who attacked unarmed the savage beasts, they found it advisable
to fight at a distance. Taking their position on trees, which was done
for safety, the problem was how to reach the enemy. They commonly
showered cocoanuts and other large fruits upon them, which, while
annoying to small animals, had little effect on tigers. They next carried
stones up the trees for missiles, which they dropped with some effect. In
time they became expert at throwing, and could strike a tiger’s head ten
paces off. Shoozoo claimed to have killed a hyena at a distance of many
alligators’ lengths with a rock larger than his head; but Shoozoo had a
reputation for lying, which was greatly developed during the war.

The Apes also broke off branches of trees, with which they pounded the
savage beasts, not only by throwing them from the trees as missiles, but
by using them as clubs, until they became skilled in the art of pounding,
as well as of making clubs. When catamounts, bears and other climbing
beasts attacked them on the trees, and fought paw to paw with them, they
used the stones as knives, and often cut their assailants fatally, having
learned to select sharp stones for this purpose, and, in time, to sharpen
them specially. Before the war they had used stones only to crack nuts.
But now they learned both to use them for many other purposes, and to
make them into the size and shape which best suited them.

The first manufactures of the Apes were thus of military implements,
their necessity being the mother of invention. In time of peace, however,
they found new uses for these implements, like their descendents who
afterwards beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into
pruning-hooks. The missiles with which they had attacked the tigers they
soon used for hunting, and in time for building. When they came down from
the trees, and lived more on the earth, they knocked cocoanuts down,
instead of climbing after them; they killed birds and rabbits by throwing
stones at them, instead of lying in wait for them, and they speared fish
with their clubs which they had learned to sharpen. They could thus act
at a greater distance, and so had more power, both to defend themselves
from wild beasts, and to obtain food.

Shoozoo, the liar just mentioned, told some wonderful stories of a stone
which he sharpened and the exploits he performed with it. He saw a lion,
he said, sleeping at the foot of a tree, when, throwing the stone, he cut
the tree from its stump, which, falling on the lion, killed him; and he
would have brought the dead lion to verify the story, but it was so big
that all the monkeys of Cocoanut Hill could not have carried it away; but
he showed the sharpened stone as evidence.

He related also that when hunting owls at night, after killing all
that were in the forest, and having nothing more to throw at, he threw
his stone at the moon, and hit it with such force that he cut off a
piece; and, as evidence of this, he pointed to the moon, which was,
indeed, seen to have a large piece gone, so that many Apes believed him
for once, though they knew he was habitually a liar. For the evidence
of their senses was generally deemed enough for the Apes. Shamboo,
however, doubted the story and asked Shoozoo why he did not bring home
the other piece of the moon. “When I cut it off,” he replied, “it fell
into the Swamp and was swallowed by an alligator. I expect to catch that
alligator, and then I will show you the rest of the moon.”

The Apes of Cocoanut Hill, however, who placed little confidence in
Shoozoo’s stories, placed less in his promises; although the next
generation, which accepted him as the founder of their religion, believed
him to be a better man, and accepted his stories as history and his
promises as prophecy; so that what was incredible to contemporaries
became indisputable to posterity; and the traditions that gathered
about his name were sufficient to silence the doubts in a generation
later which they had raised in a generation before. In course of time
the bigger stories only gained credence, the rest being forgotten; so
that what was received with most distrust was handed down with most
confidence; and the farther they got from the time of their performance
the easier it was thought to be to get at the truth about them.

For many generations every alligator that was killed was opened in
order to find the moon; and, though it was often claimed to be found,
there was never as much confidence in the story of its recovery as of
its loss; for the Apes early learned to distinguish between religious
stories, and only accepted those for which there was adequate evidence.
The uninterrupted testimony of the fathers, which had come down in
regular succession, and had never been doubted, was deemed the best
evidence. Apes have accordingly differed about the incidentals of the
story; for many accounts have come down about the details, which are not
to be reconciled; but as to the great essentials—that the holy Shoozoo
actually did knock off a piece of the moon, and that an alligator
swallowed it—there is a substantial agreement; and as often as the moon,
in generations later, appeared in crescent form, the festival of the Holy
Crescent was celebrated by throwing sharpened stones in the air in honor
of the great exploit of their Founder, Shoozoo.

But, though Shoozoo, who passed in one generation for a liar, and in
the next for a God, left a questionable heritage to the Apes, they
still retained out of his age something of substantial value. The use
of implements was invented, and the arts of making and using them were
handed down to Monkeys and Men.




 


[Illustration]

After the savage beasts had been driven from the region of Cocoanut
Hill, and the Apes had come down from the trees, and were habitually on
the ground, they found themselves encountering new dangers. The snakes
were troublesome. The snakes had, indeed, been troublesome before, but
it was mainly when they climbed the trees for birds’ nests or fruits.
The Apes did not then encounter them so often, and amid the greater
dangers from the four-footed beasts, did not find it necessary to make
war against them. But now, when the Apes walked more on the ground, they
met the snakes oftener, and under more disagreeable circumstances. The
snakes, moreover, had greatly multiplied since the destruction of the
savage beasts, many of which devoured, or fought with, snakes, or else
lived on the same food. With the departure, accordingly, of the enemies
of the serpents, and their increase of sustenance, the serpents became
powerful, and at last threatened to drive the Apes from the region. It
became dangerous to walk abroad, especially near the Swamp. At night
they disturbed the slumbers of the Apes. Shoozoo declared that he once
found two in his ear when he awoke, and that he had swallowed some big
ones during the night, although Shamboo declared contemptuously that he
only had worms.

Many precautions were, from time to time, taken against the snakes. Some
of the Apes persisted in still sleeping in the trees. Most of them,
however, sought holes in the ground and caves in the rocks, which they
fortified by piling brush and earth at the entrance; while others, not
finding holes conveniently at hand, dug them and covered them with brush,
so as to form a mound. The race had thus begun to build, and one of the
first arts—architecture—was founded. The home originated in a fight
against the serpent.

The snakes, however, soon attacked these homes, and all the more eagerly
because of the food stored in them. For the Apes found that they could
put their structures to many uses not before known. They would hold their
provisions, as well as themselves, and would protect such provisions
from the weather, as well as from the snakes, and so preserve them for
a longer time. Their homes accordingly became store-houses, and this
facility for keeping provisions by storage stimulated the collection of
them. Instead of gathering only what they wanted to eat at the time, the
Apes now picked up all they could find, and placed it in their dug-outs.
They soon learned to allow nothing to go to waste, and became economical.
They even collected when they did not want anything, from the mere fact
that they could store it, and thus became provident. They believed they
might want in the future, and so often stored large quantities; for
some Apes early became avaricious. They got in time to be as proud of
their possessions as of their homes, and often gathered from a feeling
of ambition. Shoozoo claimed that he had enough fruits in his mound to
feed all the Apes of Cocoanut Hill for a lifetime; which nobody of that
generation believed, and nobody of the next doubted.

These great quantities of fruits, we say, attracted the snakes, who were
soon found more plentiful about the homes than about the swamps. Wealth
always has its enemies, and a snake no more than a man, will work for
what he can get more easily. It was thought easier to get cocoanuts in
Shoozoo’s dug-out than by climbing a tree.

One day an ape, who had made a large collection, found, on returning
home, that all his store was gone. The snakes had broken in and eaten
what they could, and destroyed the rest by half eating it. The only sign
of the thieves was an old snake which had eaten so much that he could not
get away, and lay, like a drunken man, helpless on the ground. The ape
soon dispatched him; but that did not satisfy the ape. He was indignant,
and in his sense of suffering wrong we have the first appearance of
the ethical sentiment. The sense of wrong in others appears before we
recognize it in ourselves. The snakes did not feel the wrong; nor did the
same monkey when afterwards he went to steal some of Shoozoo’s fruit (and
found none), although he felt an indignation at Shoozoo that might be
called an incipient sense of the wrong of falsehood. He wanted to charge
Shoozoo with lying; but as that would have disclosed his own theft, or
attempt at it, he suppressed his indignation in his prudence.

[Illustration: THE ROBBERS OF THE AMMI.]

Other depredations were committed by the snakes, so that almost every
ape soon had a property grievance. Added to this was a growing personal
animosity between the Apes and the Snakes. As they had frequent contests
over the fruits, they had learned to fight, and so to hate, each other,
and finally to look upon each other as public enemies.

Nor was all the fault with the snakes. For as soon as the Apes got
to accumulating, they scoured the swamps as well as the hills for
provisions, and so met the Snakes in their own element, who had to fight
for the ungathered fruits as well as the gathered. In fact, through their
strongly developed acquisitiveness, the Apes had drained the country so
generally of its productions, that there was not enough left to support
the Snakes, so that the latter had to become criminals and attack the
gathered stores. Whenever the rich gather up everything so close as to
leave nothing for the poor, the latter will turn criminals, whether they
be snakes or men, and will steal from the rich, whether these be men or
monkeys.

There, accordingly, sprang up an antagonism between the Snakes and the
Monkeys, which had all the bitterness of class feeling, as well as of
race prejudice, and soon an irrepressible conflict was impending. The
Monkeys demanded the extirpation of the Snakes as violently as they had,
in the preceding campaign, demanded that of the tigers; and from one end
of the highlands to the other was heard the cry, “The snakes must go.”

“Steppers and crawlers,” said Shamboo, “cannot live in the same country.
If there is anything a monkey hates it is to tramp on a snake. Only
to-day one bit me in the heel, and to-morrow I shall crush his head.
Enmity is declared between our race and theirs. A snake in the grass can
never be loved by our seed; and so, until there shall be no more Snakes,
or else no more Monkeys, the conflict must go on. We came down from the
trees to the ground only to find others who had got still closer to the
ground, and were climbing the land as we had climbed the trees; and it is
a question whether belly or feet shall walk the earth. When the Apes got
down off the trees they got up on their feet; and we do not mean to again
walk through life on four feet to look for snakes.”




 


[Illustration]

The fight with the snakes, which now began, was not remarkable except for
the stories to which it gave rise. The reptiles were nearly all driven
from the country before it was over, although many of them took refuge
in the Swamp. But many tales of prowess were related of that war, which
made it famous in after times, and caused it to be the event from which
subsequent time was reckoned. Shoozoo claimed to have killed more snakes
and bigger snakes than any of the rest, and, as none could boast much of
their actual exploits, which were small compared with those claimed by
Shoozoo, they all took to lying, and thus started the habit of making
snake stories, which has come down to their descendants. These accounts
were so great that the next generation, which was the first to believe
them, ascribed marvelous powers to the heroes of this war, and so made
it the commencement of an epoch, as well as preserved the stories, with
additions, for their future theology.

“Why do you not,” asked Simlee, a young gorilla for whom Shoozoo had
formed an attachment, “bring home one of those big snakes of which you
kill so many, and proudly lay it at my feet?”

“Is it not enough,” retorted Shoozoo, “that I bring home the story of it?
The honor that comes from snakes is not in having them, but in killing
them.”

“But I want the proof of both your exploits and your love,” replied she;
“the other baboons bring something to their loved ones, and the girls
are all taunting me with your failures and your neglect. I am pining for
snakes.”

Shoozoo felt embarrassed, but, being always ready with a promise when he
lacked an achievement, said:

“I will bring you the great dragon of the swamp, the winged alligator
that rules these waters and darkens the sun when he flies.”

“I would rather have plain snakes,” she said; “I would entwine them in my
hair, and, like the girls of Jo and Kibboo, drape them as trophies about
my neck.”

“Never doubt my love,” he replied, “You shall be ensnaked; and my
conquests and your adornments will be the pride of all monkeydom.”

Simlee, thus reassured, ran laughing up a tree, while Shoozoo departed to
achieve, or invent, fame.

Arming himself with a club and a vivid imagination he went out, like Don
Quixote, for snakes and glory.

[Illustration: “SEE, BELOVED, HOW THE MIGHTY FALL AT THE WORD OF SIMLEE
AND THE STROKE OF SHOOZOO.”]

He had not gone far when he encountered an enormous snake, the first real
one he had found since the war, notwithstanding his stories, and one
which would, indeed, have delighted Simlee and given Shoozoo fame as its
slayer, had he brought it home. But, instead of Shoozoo making for the
snake, the snake made for Shoozoo. Back he turned excitedly, and there
was a long race between the snake and the monkey, the monkey keeping
ahead and gaining; and long after the snake ceased to follow Shoozoo
continued to run. At last, however, Shoozoo panting and almost out of
breath, climbed a tree, and looked about to take in the situation. And,
though he did not see the snake, he nevertheless would not come down,
but remained in the tree till night, when he sneaked home by a route
different from that by which he came.

On nearing the place where he had left Simlee in the morning, and
wondering what account he should give of his day’s adventure, he found
another huge snake lying in his path. He started back in fright; but,
assuring himself that it was dead, he approached with courage. “This,” he
said, “is my opportunity; it will both satisfy Simlee and astonish the
rest.” And so, shouldering the snake he bore it proudly back to Simlee,
and laid it at her feet with these words:

“See, beloved, how the mighty fall at the word of Simlee and the stroke
of Shoozoo!”

Simlee leaped from the tree with glee, and taking up the snake, called to
the other girls who were sitting among the branches or lying about the
mounds, to witness her good fortune.

“That’s the same snake,” replied one, “that was brought here two days ago
by Kibboo, and thrown away this morning because it had begun to smell.”

At this Simlee grew angry, and flew at the girl with open jaws, tearing
her hair and beating her face; and there would have been as hot a fight
between the women as between the men and the snakes, but for the return
of the warriors with their trophies, when the curiosity of the female
apes, which was greater than their anger, put an end to the quarrel, and
they all ran to possess themselves of the snakes for ornaments.




 


[Illustration]

We have said that the stories of the exploits of this war have been
handed down in the religion of the Apes. This is due not so much to the
achievements of the heroes as to the accounts of them by Shoozoo, who
was much more active in relating battles than in fighting them; so that,
as the heroes of the Trojan War owe more to Homer than to their own
prowess, (for many great men lived before Agamemnon, whose exploits are
forgotten for want of an imaginative historian); so the heroes of the
fight about Cocoanut Hill are chiefly indebted to the Homer of the Apes
for his reports of them. As gods, demi-gods, heroes and fair women rose
from a ten days’ skirmish on the banks of the Scamander, so divinities,
good and bad, had their origin in the Cocoanut Hill battles by reason
of a good telling. Shoozoo was, fortunately, unlike Homer, both warrior
and historian, and so, like Xenophon and Cæsar, made himself the chief
character in his accounts. The other apes nearly all drop out of history,
and their deeds are ascribed to him, who at the time of this story, was
deemed the chief character in that conflict; showing that for future fame
a good liar is better than a good fighter.

Thus the driving out of the snakes from Cocoanut Hill came in time to
be wholly attributed to Shoozoo, so that, like St. Patrick, he was
honored for the entire service of their expulsion. The great dragon, or
flying alligator, of which he only spoke to Simlee as an excuse, was,
in time, believed to have been actually killed by him, as a primitive
St. George. The snake that had entered the mound of one of the apes,
and gorged himself with its treasured fruits, and which was killed
by the ape, was alleged to have been slain by Shoozoo while guarding
great treasures in a cave, as Siegfried slew the Nibelungen dragon. The
expulsion of the snakes from Cocoanut Hill found its way into various
stories about a primitive pair of apes—Shoozoo and Simlee—whose fruit
was stolen by snakes, for which the snakes were driven from the country;
reversing the story of Adam and Eve, who took the fruit from the snake
and were themselves expelled, instead of the snake. Had Adam been his own
biographer, like Shoozoo, the story of Eden might have been reversed.

The long contest and great enmity engendered between the Monkeys and
the Snakes, also caused in time the serpent to be taken to represent
everything bad, and this conflict came in the Apian Mythology to be
represented as the conflict between good and evil, in which a great
serpent fought with Shoozoo and was overcome by him, but not altogether
slain; so that, as in the Persian Theology, the contest between good and
evil still went on, although Shoozoo was expected to come again in the
great future, and put the serpent entirely under his feet.

Also, as the serpent came to represent evil, it was believed that the
great winged alligator, with which Shoozoo fought, was the King of Evil,
or Devil, and, that, being the chief of serpents, he led all assaults
against the interests of the Apes. He was pictured with wings, tail, and
great claws, and was supposed to be the power that ruled over Alligator
Swamp, or the Land of the Bad. Apes frightened their children by saying
that the great flying Alligator would come up out of the Swamp and devour
them. Simian demonology thus had its birth. Like Juno springing from the
head of Jove, it issued full grown out of the imagination of Shoozoo,
with an alligator for its only foundation in fact.

It will thus be seen that the fight between the Monkeys and Snakes on
Cocoanut Hill, which was important in the history, became more important
in the mythology of the Apes, and, from its prominence in their profane
and sacred traditions, it is natural that the Apes should make it the
commencement of an epoch.




 


[Illustration]

After the Snakes had been driven from the region of Cocoanut Hill, and
the land thus rid of both wild beasts and reptiles, the Apes, who had now
undisputed possession, got to fighting among themselves for the land.
Those, therefore, who had united for defense now divided for conquest.

There were two principal varieties of Apes, as we have said,—the Ammi
from whom the Men are descended, and the Lali, who, while resembling the
former, were inferior in manners, and more closely resembled the present
Orang-outang. They had both sprung from the same original stock, and,
until several generations before, lived together in a more southerly
country. At length they separated, (while still in the south), the Ammi
going eastward, and the Lali westward, like the separation between
Abraham and Lot.

Being thus separated, and so removed from mutual influence, they soon
diverged in customs. The Ammi, under more favorable circumstances, began
to walk erect, to live more on the ground, to find many uses for their
hands, and to make some progress in speech. The Lali, who had wandered
into a less hospitable country, made no progress whatever, but rather
degenerated; so that when, generations later, the two varieties met again
on Cocoanut Hill, there were marked differences between them.

They had both come to the Cocoanut Hill country in a great migration of
monkeys from the South, the Ammi coming from the southeast and the Lali
from the southwest. This migration was caused by the failure of fruits
in the south on account of some cataclysm in Nature of which we have no
reliable accounts; and monkeys of every kind came north, so that there
were soon all the varieties of which we have spoken in the Cocoanut Hill
region. And this failure of fruits, we may add, was a principal cause of
the providence of the Monkeys in laying up stores; for they were anxious
that a second famine should not occur like that in the land from which
they had come.

These apes, having therefore met again, met with differences such as did
not separate them in the south country; and, though they imitated one
another to some extent (the Lali picking up some of the sounds of the
Ammi, and so acquiring by degrees the habit of speaking, and also walking
at times upright and using their hands), there were, nevertheless,
irremovable differences between the two; and, though they made common
cause as long as they had to fight tigers and snakes, they again asserted
their differences with the return of peace, and so found it impossible to
assimilate.

In view of this incongeniality the Ammi in time were found associating
wholly among themselves, and the Lali likewise among themselves.
Jealousies and suspicions arose between the two, and frequently fights.
Class distinctions gave rise to class controversies, and finally to class
wars. The Lali were soon hated as much as the snakes by the Ammi, who
conceived the project of driving them from the country; and the Lali, in
turn, resolved also to get the country for themselves.

After several conflicts, in which now one party and then the other was
successful, and after several temporary compromises, in which they tried
to live together, the Lali, partly vanquished and partly persuaded,
consented to withdraw to the lands beyond the Swamp, leaving the Ammi in
possession of the Cocoanut Hill region.

The separation, however, was no settlement. The Lali claimed the land
which they did not take, and hoped to get in the future what they were
willing to surrender for the present. The two parties stood, like Germany
and France over Alsace and Lorraine, growling much, but doing little.
Occasionally they made incursions into each other’s territory, and
carried away some fruit or provisions; but, though they talked chiefly
of war, they lived mainly in peace. Separated by snakes and swamps, they
were kept at peace by the difficulty of coming together. The danger of
crossing, and the delay in going around the Swamp, were too great for war.

This was the condition and situation of the two forces which occupied the
world as known to our ancestors at the time of this story.

Having made this digression on the antiquities of the Apes and a bit
of their history, in which we have seen the origin of their religion,
government and industries, and of many of their customs, we shall now
return to the scenes beginning this story, which are nearly a century
later.




 


[Illustration]

Sosee had come down from the tree in which she received the news of the
rape of Orlee, described in   and, though she had given orders
to Koree to bring back the child, she did not herself remain inactive.
She rushed into the crowd, and, calling upon all, with wild screams, to
rescue the child, went herself into the Swamp, and without any notion
of where she was going, wandered about aimlessly till night, being
completely lost. She found her way back only by the light of the moon,
whose position in the heavens was some guide in her wanderings. Nor would
she have returned at all, had she not hoped that some one else had, in
the mean while, brought back the child.

On returning to the place from which she had started, she was distressed
to learn that Orlee was not found, and she could scarcely be restrained
from immediately starting again in pursuit of her. As Koree, however,
had not yet returned, having searched farther and later than any, except
Sosee, she hoped that he, inspired by her love, would come back with
success. She had most confidence in him because she had most love for
him, believing that what most pleased her fancy would best serve her
purpose.

Her first disappointment in love was when she saw Koree return without
the child; for in this crisis she felt more for her sister than for her
lover, the newly lost being ever dearer than the long loved. Koree had
failed to meet her expectation, or rather her desire; and in times of
disappointment the little that is lacking outweighs all that is not.

“You have failed to bring back Orlee and the tail of the fat baboon,” she
said, “Despair of my love till you fetch me both.”

This was spoken in the half-articulate manner already explained, as was
the balance of the conversation (which we translate, however, into modern
expression).

“What all the race of the Ammi could not do,” he replied, “you ought not
to blame your lover for not accomplishing.”

“The love of one,” she retorted, “can do more than the indifference of
many. If Orlee is ever found it will be by love, and not by numbers.”

“I will yet fetch her back,” he said; “love’s work is not exhausted in
one effort, but requires time for its fruit. She will come in response to
your love acting through mine. Neither man nor monkey shall defeat me, or
excel me, in this task.”

“Go, then,” she said, “and I will go with you. Love co-operates, and
never commands only.”

“I will go,” he replied: “and not care whether I return. With Sosee at my
side, I could roam forever, indifferent whither we come, so we be still
together. Had we not gone alone before we would not have returned without
Orlee; but we came back to see each other. Love left behind defeats its
own purpose sent before. If we separate we will be hunting each other,
instead of keeping our thoughts on Orlee.”

“Let us then go,” she said, “and keep ourselves and our purposes united,
and resolve not to return till we come with her.”

“I will go; for then will I have everything with me, and nothing to come
back for.”

“If you go for my company only,” she said, “and not for the child, you
will soon have neither. To be my lover you must want what I want, and not
merely want me; and if you do not get it you will soon be without me, for
love must achieve success to be rewarded with love.”

“I want more your wish than my own, and will give up everything for it.”

“Except me.”

“Yes, and you even.”

“You mean thing! I won’t go with you.”

“Well,” he replied, “I won’t go alone.”

“You don’t care for me a bit,” she said.

“You only care for me to serve your purpose,” he retorted.

“I will get Kibboo to go with me,” she next said.

“He may go,” replied Koree, “and I will stay with Alee till you return.
She is a better climber, and can run faster than you.”

“Boo! hoo! she has no hair on her back, and is meaner than you. She ran
from a little snake which I could bite in two.”

“But she loves me, and never quarrels with me.”

“She don’t love you; she only hates me, and wants to make you do so. She
loves Ki, and picked the fleas off him when he came from the Swamp this
evening.”

“Do you love me, Sosee?” he next asked with more tenderness.

“I won’t tell you,” she replied, sobbing.

“Will you go with me, and stay with me?”

“I never said I wouldn’t.”

Here followed a long pause, during which Sosee sobbed and sighed, and
Koree looked about in his mind for some excuse for making peace without
seeming to want to. Sosee came to his relief, however, with a question.

“Koree?”

“Well?”

“Will you go with me to find Orlee?”

Sosee, too proud to ask for his love, had asked for his service.

“Yes,” he replied, glad to give both, “and will not come back till we
find her.”

“Won’t that be delightful! to hunt and find her together!”

“Yes,” he replied, “and let us start to-night, and before morning we may
find her.”

But night and weariness had settled down upon them, and as the older men
and women had determined to wait till morning before recommencing the
search, the two lovers concluded to do likewise, saying that they could
then search with greater vigor.

They then walked awhile, though weary, in the moonlight, and discoursed
of love and Orlee, he speaking of his devotion and she of her confidence
that he would bring back her sister.

“How approvingly,” he said “the monkey in the moon looks down upon our
love.”

“And upon our resolution,” she replied.

They then parted to sleep for the night; and soon their love, their
weariness and their purpose were all forgotten, except in disturbed
dreams, in which he thought of wandering through unknown swamps with
Sosee, and she pictured the rescue of her sister by a heroic lover.

In the silence and longing of that night, however, Koree audibly breathed
the following sentiment, which is the first poetry made by the human race:

    What is life
    Without a wife?




 


[Illustration]

As rosy-colored Morn advanced to greet the opening eyes of monkeys and
men, and spread her beams over Cocoanut Hill, lifting at last the veil
of mists which hung over Alligator Swamp, a fat baboon was seen wending
his way with a child in his arms to the settlement of the Lali. All night
long he had traversed wood and swamp, picking his way through bush and
fen, eluding the serpent and fleeing from the cry of the catamount, his
only companion the moon, and his only hope the morning.

“I have avenged the rape of Soolee,” he said, as he approached the
assembled Apes who were expecting the several warriors back which had
gone to the country of the Ammi to recover the child that had been
recently captured by them.

Great chatterings and shouts of gratification went up from the Lali as
they saw one of their number thus return victorious. Only the mother of
Soolee appeared distressed.

“Where is my child?” she asked.

“I have brought one of the Ammi instead,” was the response of the warrior.

“A man,” replied she, “is no compensation for a monkey; and the finding
of another is no comfort to a mother for the loss of her own.”

[Illustration: I HAVE BROUGHT ONE OF THE AMMI INSTEAD.]

“You can have her for a slave,” was the reply. “You lost one, and you get
one: it makes no difference whether you have the same or not.”

The mother, however, was not satisfied, although the rest thought her
grievance a small matter. The honor of the Apes was asserted by the
reprisal; and when the public interest is conserved the multitude cares
little for the individual loss.

Orlee was placed in charge of this woman, who, notwithstanding her
dissatisfaction, was delighted, not only at having a child, but at
the fact that it represented the vengeance of her people. This double
relation to the infant made her both love the child and mistreat it, the
first because it was a child, and the latter because it stood in place of
her own.

It was customary for the Apes, and also for the Men, when they had taken
prisoners from each other, to reduce them to slavery, a custom which had
arisen, however, only since their separation; for prior to that, they had
neither property nor interest in each other’s work; and so neither man
nor ape was believed to be worth anything. But, in acquiring property
they put value on men as well as on cocoanuts, and kept each other as a
treasure where before they had killed each other as a nuisance. Some even
went to war for the prisoners, and the more valuable they found men to be
the more they fought them, until they soon came to want enemies more than
friends, and to like them better than allies. They fought for something
instead of against something, and numbered their prisoners rather than
their victories. Both sides became kidnappers, instead of warriors, and
the principle and practice of slavery was established, as a result of
learning the worth of men.

The warrior Oboo, who had brought Orlee to the Lali, was seen all day to
hang around the woman in whose charge the child had been placed. Some
thought it was on account of his interest in the child; but shrewder
apes said it was on account of his interest in the woman. As the
newly-arrived child had obtained a mother he thought it ought also to
have a father. The female ape did not repel the advances of the warrior,
but said that if he would also restore her own child he might be father
to both. The mother was, however, much comforted for the loss of her
child by this gain of a father for it. The two wanted both to attend
to the new child, the result of which was that the child received no
attention, which proved serious, as we shall see. For they paid so much
attention to each other that they often wholly forgot the child.

This warrior, Oboo, had not a good reputation among the Lali. Several
scandals had already disgraced him, and his attention to this new woman
was looked upon with suspicion.

“No good will come of it,” said an observant ape, who remembered his
gallantries to others, and who was aware that he seized every pretext to
ingratiate himself with a susceptible female ape. His bravery, however,
had made him a favorite among the women, although his gallantry had much
to do with it. He was a Simian “Masher,” and twice got his head pounded
by male apes who did not like his attentions to their female friends.

This ape was charged with starting out for the child, not because he
wanted it, but because he wanted the mother, and because he hoped that
his bravery would be rewarded with her love. Thus are the motives of
apes, like those of men, impugned from jealousy, and our greatest
warriors are traduced by their rivals. No pains were spared to suggest
these suspicions to the woman herself, especially by another ape who
had loved her, and had likewise started for her child and come back
unsuccessful. These two male apes finally came together, and when
one charged the other with cowardice, and was charged in turn with
“spooniness,” they came to blows, or rather scratches, and would have
killed each other had not the woman interposed.

“There is not much difference between you in virtue,” she said, “and
whoever brings back my child shall be thought the braver.”

“Will you give up that ape if I bring back your child?” asked the
new-comer.

“Yes, but I will stay with him till then for having brought this one,”
was her reply.

The ape departed at this rebuff, divided in his thoughts between the
purpose of recovering the child and that of punishing his rival for his
insolence and his success.




 


[Illustration]

The morning after the quarrel and make-up between Koree and Sosee, these
two lovers started out to rescue Orlee from the captivity just mentioned.
They tried in vain to induce the Ammi to go out as a body to recapture
her, but nearly all except these two had exhausted their strength and
their interest the day before. An excitement did not last as long with
the Ammi as with their present descendants, and when they were not all
interested they were quickly reconciled to an outrage. Koree and Sosee,
however, in their first ardor of love, knew no rest, and had not yet
learned to despair.

Arming themselves, therefore, with clubs and sharp stones, they started
around the Swamp, intending to travel by day and at night to steal upon
the camp of the Lali and take the child by some artifice. They kept
along the border of the Swamp, and where it was not too deep to wade,
cut across its waters. The danger of neither wild beasts nor serpents
terrified them. They were together, and were fixed on one purpose. Koree
was willing to die with his Sosee, and Sosee believed she was in no
danger with her Koree. So with resignation or confidence they marched on,
heedless of a plunging alligator or swinging python which occasionally
disturbed the stillness of the Swamp. Occasionally they stopped to gather
mussels or climb after nuts; for they did not think it necessary to take
provisions with them. The supplies of scouts and armies in those days
were light—they foraged on the country. They marched without chart or
compass, and yet rarely missed their way; for they had learned to guide
themselves by the sun and the lay of the land. If occasionally, in the
thick of the forest, they could not get their bearings, they emerged from
the swamp to look at the mountains with whose ranges they were familiar.

It was not easy for primitive man to get lost, and it did not much matter
if he was lost. Wherever he placed his foot he was at home, carrying
his citizenship with him. Everywhere around were his possessions—the
ungathered fruits and fish and game. Everywhere were his friends—the
chance baboon or man that he might meet. Only recently, with the
association which we mentioned, had there sprung up attachments for
individuals. Before that their love was for the race, and anyone
represented that race about equally well, as in the case of dogs. Even
since they had come to associate, their attachments were not permanent;
and they relied much on chance-comers for their society. Should they,
therefore, be lost, they would not feel that they were among strangers,
any more than that they were away from home.

“If we do not find Orlee will we go back?” asked Koree.

“We will not go back till we find her,” replied Sosee.

“We could live nicely in this forest,” said he; “there is plenty of food,
and we need no company.”

“When we find Orlee,” she replied, “we will have company.”

“Two is company,” said he, “and when we find her and take her to her
mother, shall we not come here to live?”

“Let us first find her,” she persisted; “we can then decide what to do
next.”

“There is nothing that we can lack here,” mused Koree; “a forest and a
swamp include all human desires;” and then, after a pause, he added, “and
Sosee.”

“And Orlee,” interposed Sosee.

“Love in a cottage” was long antedated by “love in a forest.” A sycamore
tree was cottage enough for our first parents.

“O! O! O! O!” ejaculated Sosee, too frightened to say more, as she
suddenly ran up a tree.

“Oo! Oo! Oo! Oo!” shrieked Koree, as he ran up another tree.

The cause of this sudden fright was a huge mammoth which slowly lifted
itself from a clump of bushes and walked toward the lovers. A great hairy
elephant, twice as large as those now existing, with long front legs,
carrying his bushy body high up in the air, and a back gradually sloping
to the ground, like a giraffe—such was the monster that confronted them.

[Illustration: KOREE AND SOSEE ENCOUNTER A MONSTER.]

Sosee had run up a slim sapling which this beast could easily have torn
up with his trunk, or from which he could have shaken her down like a
cocoanut; while Koree had run up a tree stout enough, indeed, to resist
uprooting or shaking, but so low that the monster could easily have
reached him with his long trunk. Their safety lay, therefore, in their
silence, and they were accordingly quiet,—quiet even for lovers.

The mammoth was in no hurry to leave the place. He browsed about slowly,
picking up bunches of grass, or reaching after leaves. Once he picked a
trunk full of leaves from the tree in which Koree was sitting; but he
took no notice of Koree, whether because he did not see him, or because
he did not care for him. Koree and Sosee alone were concerned,—not the
pachyderm. They remained simply quiet, and left the great beast in
undisputed possession of the field. Never were two lovers more cruelly
interrupted, and never did an unwelcome intruder stay so long.

“Two is company,” said Koree to himself, “and three is a great big crowd.”

The lovers could neither touch nor speak.

“Would that our trees were nearer,” whispered Koree.

“Or stouter,” replied Sosee.

“Or taller,” returned Koree.

“Never did I think,” muttered Sosee, “that anything so great could come
between our love.”

“Ugh!” shuddered they both.

The huge beast kept on eating, unconscious that he was a bore.

“I wonder when that brute will get enough,” muttered Sosee in impatience.

“If he is going to fill all that big carcass,” replied Koree, “we are up
here for all day.”

“Our only hope is that the leaves of these trees will give out,” replied
she, “so that he must go elsewhere to finish his dinner.”

“Or that he will want to take something to drink with his meal,” replied
Koree, “and so go to the Swamp to wet his snout.”

These breathings of the lovers were unnoticed by the monster, who took
them for whisperings of the wind, and went on leisurely eating.

“Never did I see such an appetite,” said Sosee.

“Or one so contented with its dinner,” added Koree.

“I don’t like this seat,” grumbled Sosee, “I wish we were on the same
tree.”

“I neither want to sit up here,” returned Koree, “nor get down.”

“I’m hungry,” said Sosee, after a long pause. “Never did I sit so long at
a meal, and not eat anything.”

“If this meal of the brute goes on much longer,” said Koree, “we will
both starve, or else be eaten.”

Just then, to the inexpressible relief of the tired, hungry and bored
lovers, the animal showed signs of satiety. He quit eating, looked around
with an air of satisfaction, stretched himself, and made a start, as if
about to leave the place. Their gratification, however, was short. He
walked around a few steps, and then, to their dismay, lay down under the
tree on which Koree was perched, and disposed himself for an afternoon
nap.

Koree looked at Sosee, and was silent.

Sosee returned the look, but was too disgusted and empty for utterance.

“If that beast sleeps as long as he eats,” she said, “we will get neither
supper nor slumber to night.”

“We will, however,” returned Koree, “be safe; for neither ape nor snake
will attack us with such a watch at our door. So one danger wards off
another.”

They were now reconciling themselves to spend the balance of the day, and
perhaps the night, in this situation, and also to add to their weariness,
hunger and disgust, the additional discomforts of sleeplessness and
danger. For as Sosee had never slept on a tree (the Ammi having come to
the ground before her birth), it was feared that, although her feet were
still prehensile, and served her well in climbing, they might fail her
from lack of practice when it came to holding to a limb when asleep.
Koree determined not to sleep under these circumstances, both because he
could not trust himself on a tree when asleep, and because he wanted to
watch Sosee in order to rescue her from the mammoth in case she should
fall. Love up a tree was thus faithful to the last.

While they were making their preparations for a continued disappointment,
however, an accident, which at first seemed disastrous, came happily to
their relief. Koree, in restlessly changing his position, fell off the
tree, and came down with a thump on the back of the mammoth.

Whether Koree or the monster was more frightened we know not. Koree,
however, was uninjured, the great beast breaking his fall, for the huge
back of the animal reached, when lying down, well up toward the branches
on which Koree was sitting. Sosee was, perhaps, the most frightened of
all, as one is often most scared at the danger of another; and she gave a
scream which the animal hearing, believed, in connection with the thump
on his back, to be caused by some other animal that was attacking him.

He started from his sleep and his position at once, and, without looking
for the cause of danger, rushed through the forest, while Koree ran up
another tree and waited till the brute was at a safe distance. Then both
he and Sosee came down, and returned thanks to the great Shoozoo for
their deliverance.




 


[Illustration]

The two lovers had no other adventure until they came the next afternoon
to the farther side of the swamp, where the Lali were settled. There they
were astonished at the multitude of the Lali, who greatly outnumbered the
Ammi, fairly swarming in the trees and in the open country beyond.

It was not deemed safe to venture out of the Swamp in the presence of so
many apes, some of whom would doubtless recognize them as belonging to
the Ammi; so they determined to hide in the bushes till night, and then
reconnoitre.

In the meantime they had abundant opportunity to watch the movements
of the Apes, who kept in groups, as if fearing an attack, although an
occasional one was seen alone, and some few came even into the Swamp. The
two lovers did not fear the approach of single apes, or even of a small
group; for, as there were many varieties among the Lali, and not a single
kind only, as among the Ammi, the appearance of a new kind raised no
suspicion. The Ammi, or Men, moreover, were hardly distinguishable from
certain of the Lali, at least by the Apes.

“The chance of finding Orlee among so many,” said Sosee, “is not good;
and if we find her we cannot take her from them.”

“Wait till it is dark,” replied Koree, “and the groups will disperse,
when we can both approach them without suspicion, and carry her off
without resistance. Trust your lover.”

“I trust you, or I should have not come with you, or have asked you to
come,” she answered; “but I see no way to accomplish our object.”

“Do you see that big baboon beyond the crowd walking alone with an ape?”
he next asked. “He looks like the fellow that struck me when Orlee was
carried off.”

“It must be the same,” replied Sosee; “for there is a child near him
which looks like Orlee.”

“I think that is only a young monkey,” replied Koree, “which has been
taken out by its parents.”

“The three pay no attention to the other Apes,” replied Sosee, “and
are wandering still farther from them. Let us approach them; in their
absorption it will cause no alarm.”

“If it is the baboon which I think it is, he will know me,” replied
Koree. “At least I cannot mistake him.”

“If we could get a little nearer,” said she, “I could tell whether it is
Orlee or not.”

“But we cannot get near the child without getting near the parents,”
replied Koree.

“She has wandered off from her keepers,” retorted Sosee. “Let us approach
slowly.”

“Wait till it is darker,” said he. “We can then get near enough to
recognize her without being recognized by them.”

“They pay no attention to the child,” continued she, “which is moving
away from them; and if she goes much farther we can get near enough to
see her distinctly without their noticing us.”

“They seem, however,” said he, “to be much interested in something. Such
earnestness among monkeys has a meaning.”

“It cannot concern the child,” replied she, “and between their absorption
and her distance, we can get her away while they are thinking about
themselves.”

“I hate the looks of that baboon,” mused Koree.

“I like the looks of that child,” replied Sosee.

“I will get her if it is Orlee,” he said, “but I want to avoid a blow
from that brute. We had better be sure it is Orlee before we take the
risk of a broken head in finding out.”

“The child keeps upright far more than the others, which makes me think
it is not theirs,” said Sosee.

“I should like to have the child just to avenge the blow I received,”
said Koree; “but I don’t want to have a second blow to avenge.”

“I will take the blow if you will get the child,” replied Sosee.

“As long as the two old apes are so near it, we could not carry it off
if we got it,” he said. “They would pursue us and overtake us with our
load.”

“Two ought to be able to resist two; and Orlee would help us,” replied
she.

“Before our fight could end the other apes would come to their succor,”
said he.

“Perhaps,” suggested Sosee, “they would give up Orlee if I would stay
with them instead.”

“I do not like that suggestion,” replied Koree, “I will get Orlee and
keep you. Would you rather have Orlee than me?”

“I was not thinking of that, but only of Orlee.”

They had now approached near enough to see the girl distinctly, whom they
recognized to be Orlee. She had wandered so far from her keepers that
they did not observe the approaching lovers. Koree and Sosee concluded to
steal up to Orlee, and, without raising any suspicion, lead her in the
direction of the Swamp and then hurry with her into the bushes where they
could not be followed. As it was getting dark the time seemed propitious
for their scheme.

The couple in charge of Orlee, were, as will be surmised, Oboo, the ape
who had carried her off, and the woman Oola, in whose charge she had
been placed. This ape continued his attendance on this woman without
interruption, having, while the other Lali were amusing themselves in
groups, wandered off with her and the child to be alone. This accounts
for their distance from the rest of the Apes. They were so much absorbed,
moreover, with each other, that they did not notice that the child,
Orlee, had wandered away from them, and was now almost out of their
sight, and entirely out of their thoughts. Oboo and the woman simply
kept up their love-making, while Koree and Sosee were approaching their
prize. What made one pair of lovers forgetful made the other pair alert.
Love shuts and opens the eyes of mortals in turn, and lays off the
harness from one which it puts on another.

As soon as Orlee recognized her sister she gave a scream of joy which
disconcerted the plans of Sosee and Koree. It also startled Oboo and
the woman out of their bliss, who now experienced all the horrors of
interruption which the other two lovers had suffered the day before on
the appearance of the mammoth. Oboo felt most disappointed, and the woman
most frightened. They sprang up, and, for a minute, were bewildered,
thinking that some curious apes, perhaps rivals, had come suddenly upon
them, through jealousy or stupidity, to interrupt their _tète-a-tète_.
The woman instinctively sprang in the direction of the child, while Oboo
looked around to see who was the cause of the interruption. Soon they
both took in the situation and started in pursuit of the child.

Koree, perceiving that no time was to be lost, had picked up the child
and started for the Swamp, Sosee following at full speed. The child,
frightened by the bustle, set up a combined screaming and chattering,
which attracted the attention of the other Apes and called a large number
of them into the pursuit. The scene for a few minutes was like that of a
couple of foxes pursued by a pack of hounds, in which the foxes were fast
making for the woods.




 


[Illustration]

All now depended on whether Koree and Sosee with the child could reach
the Swamp in time to conceal themselves before the Lali should arrive.
For so dense was the under-growth in the Swamp that it was next to
impossible to discover man or beast that should attempt to hide there.

Sosee could easily have gained the Swamp in time for safety, but Koree,
who was encumbered with the child, and so could not run as fast as she,
was in danger of capture by Oboo, who was fast gaining upon him. Sosee,
indeed, had already reached the Swamp, and was about to plunge into its
thickets and out of danger, when she turned to see if Koree and the child
were making their escape.

She was horrified to perceive that the pursuers were close upon them; and
so, instead of saving herself, she turned on them, and made a desperate
effort to rescue her companions. Before she could reach them, however,
Koree was overtaken by Oboo, when, releasing the child, he dealt Oboo a
powerful blow, which stunned him, and, at the same time, avenged the blow
received by Koree from the same ape some days before. Sosee now came up,
and, flying at the ape with screams and scratches, dealt him another blow
scarcely less severe than that administered by Koree. These two blows
compelled the ape to loose his hold for the moment.

[Illustration: THE RESCUE OF ORLEE.]

Released in this way from his pursuers, Koree picked up the child and
again started for the woods, while the ape, recovering from his blows,
again started in pursuit. He was gaining on Koree a second time, and
would have overtaken him again, had not the course of Koree and Sosee
now begun to diverge; for in their anxiety to escape neither had noticed
the direction taken by the other in their new start, and so they became
separated.

Oboo, observing the beauty and agility of Sosee, felt a desire to possess
her which outweighed his anxiety for the child. “She is prettier than the
old woman,” he said to himself, “and I will go for her.” Oboo always had
time, even in a fight or a race, to observe an attractive female, and
his head was invariably turned by the sight, no matter at what business
he was engaged. He accordingly turned from the pursuit of Koree and
Orlee, and started after the girl. The scratches and pounding which he
had received from her were no warning to him, but rather increased his
infatuation by testifying to her spirit. Love at first sight is greater
among Apes than among Men, and overcomes more obstacles. Accustomed to
fight for their females, and often to take them by overcoming them in
fight, the love of our primitive ancestors was often “love at first
fight.” Oboo, therefore, forgot his heroism in his passion, and,
abandoning all that he had set out to accomplish, started in pursuit of
his pleasure before he was yet out of his pain, and thought of enjoying
the caresses of a lover, while still smarting under her blows. The battle
of Mars thus turned into the battle of Cupid, and the warrior, turned
lover, continued the pursuit without much changing his method.

While Oboo was thus pursuing Sosee, Koree with the child in his arms had
reached the thicket, and was safe. Other apes came up, indeed, to the
edge of the swamp, and penetrated its depths; but, as it was getting
dark, they soon turned back, discontinuing the pursuit. While there were
many things to be found in the Swamp, their experience had taught them
that nothing was ever found there which was sought for. They might get
other apes or other game, but any particular thing that had escaped in
that tangled waste was deemed irretrievably lost.

In the mean time the pursuit of Sosee continued. Love added its
inspiration to that of prowess in the breast of her pursuer. Oboo ran for
both pleasure and glory. He must have the girl both because he wanted
her, and because he dared not return without her. Hence he ran as one
who had everything at stake; and so did she. Like Camilla, scouring the
plain, she put the Ape-land far behind her, while the distant forest
seemed, like Birnam Wood, to be fast approaching her.

Like the timid hare pursued by the hunter, which darts straight for the
shelter of the thick brush or dense cedars, her ears laid back upon her
shoulders, and her feet in the air, gliding with a billowy motion to a
place of safety, so the swift Sosee ran, measuring off the rapid miles
under her feet, while her panting warrior-lover, hotly pursuing, sought
to take her ere she should find a refuge in the dense groves beyond.

Sosee at last gained the swamp, and was secure from the determined Oboo,
who saw her disappear at once out of his sight and out of his hope. The
other apes, moreover, which had pursued from a distance, abandoned the
chase when they saw her enter the jungle, as a dog ceases to pursue a
bird which has flown into the air.

But while she thus escaped her pursuers, she did not so easily escape
those who awaited her. Scarcely had she entered the forest when she was
met by several apes who were returning from the pursuit of Koree. These,
seeing Sosee approach the forest, ran along its border (still keeping
behind the foliage), with a view of heading her off. These now sprang
suddenly upon her, and, after a short struggle, made her a prisoner.




 


[Illustration]

Sosee was led back to the settlement of the Lali, where she was the
admiration of all the Apes. Her bright face, her beautiful form, and her
shapely limbs fixed the attention of old and young. Her captors were
particularly proud and received the congratulations of all the rest, who
had now returned from the pursuit of the fugitives.

Oboo alone was unhappy. He was disappointed, both because he did not
capture the girl, and because another did. One’s loss is greatest when it
is another’s gain. He had visions of love which he must now exchange for
those of jealousy. Quick to conceive a fancy he was slow to give it up.
Started on a pursuit of love, he was never satisfied till he had achieved
a success. And, to make his condition worse, the woman Oola, in whose
charge Orlee had been given, and to whom Oboo had been making love, flew
into a rage because he had allowed Orlee to escape.

“I am now wholly without a child,” she said; “you are no ape, to fail
to overtake a boy encumbered with a girl. You sought my love only to
betray me, and now I am without either lover or child; for with you I
will have nothing more to do. You care less for me than for the girl whom
you followed, instead of my child. If you ever make a soft face at me
again, I will scratch out your eyes. I have lost everything through your
unmonkey-like conduct.”

Oboo had not much to say, for he could not talk anything well except
love, and that he could not talk in company. So he took her reproaches,
but felt humiliated; and his embarrassment was increased by the raillery
of the others, who said he could love but could not run, and that in
the tussle with the girl, he had been beaten. They were so merry at his
expense, all the company joining in, that he got his “monkey up,” and,
becoming enraged, vented his ill humor on Ilo, the successful ape, who
had brought back Sosee.

“You could not have caught her,” he said, “if I had not driven her into
your arms.”

“You would never drive a girl into another’s arms, if you could avoid
it,” replied Ilo; at which the company chattered merrily their assent.

“I should have caught her,” he said “had you not interfered. She was
already mine, and you only took after her after she was captured.”

“I suppose,” replied the other, “you would like to have her, now that you
have lost the old woman.”

“I am entitled to her,” he said, “and I shall take her from you.”

“You could not keep her when you had her,” replied Ilo; “and do you
expect to both take her from me and keep her yourself?”

“You got her by chance, and could not help taking her when she ran into
your arms.”

“I notice, however, that you did not take her when she ran into your
arms,” was the reply.

“I will show you,” said Oboo, “that I can take her from both herself and
her captor;” at which he seized the girl, and was about to lead her away,
when the other dealt him a severe blow.

This was the signal for a great fight. Oboo sprang at the assailant,
striking him with hand and foot. The latter then flew at Oboo with both
hands, seizing him by the neck. There was now a hand to hand struggle,
in which Oboo tried to punch the stomach of his rival, while the latter
tried to throw Oboo to the ground. Oboo with his great jaws seized the
shoulder of Ilo, who, in turn, dealt Oboo a blow with the other hand,
and then bit off his ear. They now fought with both hands and feet and
jaws, and the region round about echoed with their growls. Oboo was
finally thrown to the ground, when the other jumped upon him, and nearly
beat out his breath. As often as he tried to rise the other knocked him
down, and sat upon him. The victory was evidently with Ilo, and Oboo
would have fared worse had not the woman, who really started the quarrel,
now interfered to end it. She took the part of her _quondam_ lover, for
whom she discovered a lingering affection, as soon as she saw that he
was likely to be slain. She growled and seized the victorious ape, and,
after a little struggle between the three, Oboo was allowed to get up and
walk away. Too weak to fight and too cross not to, he gave some savage
growls as he retreated, and threatened to whip his contestant and take
away the girl at another time.

Oboo felt that this was an inglorious day for him—to lose two lovers and
get one thrashing. He had, however, only himself to blame. He persisted
in making love when he should have been watching a captive. He failed
to catch either a young man or a young girl, and when the latter ran
into his arms, he failed to retain her, but got worsted in the struggle
which ensued; and when he finally would avenge his failures on a more
successful ape, he was ingloriously beaten. He therefore lost prestige,
military and social, for which he said all the Apes would have to suffer.
He was more angry after his fights than in them, so that his rage came
at a time when it could not serve him. Monkeys, like men, are more angry
at others for their own failures than for anything else, and so Oboo
determined to avenge his own blunders on others.

The only one who showed him any sympathy was the woman Oola, who got him
into all his trouble. She indicated a willingness to take him back into
favor. But Oboo was too cross to entertain proposals even of love, and he
went grumbling away, like Achilles, to meditate mischief and make himself
more miserable.




 


[Illustration]

Such was the wrath of Oboo, great monkey from beyond the Swamp, which,
kindled by defeated love, against all mortals, sent many souls of
heroes to the Shades, and gave their bodies a prey to beasts and birds.
Unappeased it flamed in wars unquenchable, and almost sent the human
race out of history, and gave back the earth to monkeys, snakes and
wide-spreading marshes.

Instigated by the woman who had lost her child, and who was for a second
time bereaved by the loss of its substitute, Oboo proposed the next day
that Sosee be given back to the Ammi, in exchange for the child first
captured. This was suggested, not because he cared for the child, but
because he desired to punish the ape who had got possession of Sosee. If
he could not himself have the girl, he did not want another to have her.
Such jealousy was in the minds of sub-mortals.

This the swift-footed Ilo, captor of Sosee, stoutly resisted. “If you
touch a hair of that maiden,” he said, “I will jump with both feet
against your belly and scratch out all monkeydom. To your licking of last
night I will add your death to-day. Hear me, O Shoozoo, if ever monkey
was so wronged as I, and help me to avenge myself upon this insolent
gusher, who has already made love to all the apes, and now wants my
little and dear prize, which alone is to comfort my home, and gather my
plantains in the far off forests of the uplands.”

And he walked along the shore of the loud-roaring frog pond.

In the meantime Koree, who had eluded his pursuers, was picking his way
through the Swamp, carrying Orlee in his arms and Sosee in his heart,
hoping that his beloved was likewise threading her way by another route
to the Ammi, where they would soon meet to enjoy perpetually their love.
This consummation, however, was not to be reached so soon; but many
adventures must first be encountered by both.

As he journeyed on he saw a great cloud spreading over the Swamp,
darkening the skies, so that he supposed that Night had suddenly settled
down upon Day. Great swarms of bats came out and filled the air with
their dull beatings, which added terror to the mystery.

Then followed a great rain, or flood from the skies, which, though
lasting but a few minutes, came in such torrents that trees were broken
in two and all the land submerged. Koree believed that the Sea had
suddenly come upon the Land with the Night, and that Death had come with
both to claim him and all things else.

The sun, however, soon came out, reviving his hope; but it came so hot,
that though it scarcely penetrated the thick foliage, which was matted
with tangled vines, it generated stifling gases, which, rising from the
damp shades, nearly strangled him; so that, having escaped death from the
water, he now expected it from the air.

Next came a great terror, and he expected to die from fright. There was a
desperate battle between a hippopotamus and an alligator which reddened
the yellow flood, and stirred it into a wilder foam than the great rain
had done. The alligator he believed to be the great Dragon of Shoozoo, or
Devil of the Watery World.

Soon the whole swamp was filled with animals. Called out by the
rain, some had come to feed, knowing that the waters, stirred by the
shower, would be alive with fish and reptiles, while others—great
land animals—had been disturbed in their lairs by the washout. Among
these last was a great three-toed tapir, which seemed to be lost; and,
following near it, came a more graceful animal, having a long tail and
two-toed feet, forming a kind of intermediate type between a hog and
a deer. These two animals were closely watched by a cave lion, which,
washed out of his cave by the flood, was approaching them stealthily in
hope of a meal. The sight was one of mingled fear and relief to Koree;
for if the lion had not his eye on some desirable game, he would have
attacked him. He awaited, therefore, with anxiety the next movements of
the beasts, expecting another fight like that between the hippopotamus
and the alligator, when a more dreadful sight alarmed both him and the
lion, as well as the game which the lion was pursuing, and started them
all in different directions.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE IN THE SWAMP.]

This was the appearance of a Dinotherium running at full speed, with
another animal on its back, both engaged in a fatal conflict. This
Dinotherium looked to Koree like a moving hill, so huge were his
dimensions. He was a combination of elephant, camel and kangaroo, having
a huge hunch on his back, powerful tusks issuing from his jaws, and a
pouch underneath, like our Marsupials. The beast on his back was what is
known to scientists as a Machairodus, a terrible, carnivorous, cat-like
creature, with long saber-shaped canines in its upper jaw, fitting it
to pull down and destroy the huge pachyderms (which could easily shake
off a lion or tiger.) This monster and this terror of the forest, which
together seemed like all the great animals rolled into one, were now
united in a death deal. While the cat-like beast was fastening its fangs
in the flesh of the other, the latter tried alternately to shake him off
and to roll over him. But the savage beast, with great skill, defeated
these attempts. The huge monster next tried to run under the horizontal
limb of a tree, which, though high, was yet too low to permit him to
pass under with his load. Koree thought that the beast on top would now
be scraped off; but not so. On approaching the limb he jumped over it,
like a circus-rider, and alighted on the running beast on the other side.
The two now darted on through the Swamp, and at last plunged into a deep
lake. The rider was thrown from his place, and, as he could not swim,
was drowned. The other, however, which was accustomed to navigate the
lakes of this region, and often entered even the open sea, swam across
the lake (a deep pool in the slough,) and there, after floating awhile,
like a ship unable to find a harbor, moored himself to the bank with his
tusks; and in this position Koree left him.

“Where can Sosee be during this flood?” soliloquized Koree, as he started
again on his way; “and will she escape the rage of all these beasts?”
He remembered, however, her agility in climbing trees, and her repeated
escapes from greater dangers; so that his fears were soon calmed in his
confidence, and the thought of meeting her again made him quickly forget
the great forces of nature and animals which he had just seen in their
struggles.




 


[Illustration]

When Koree returned with his charge to the Ammi, these were engaged in
one of their sports, which consisted in throwing cocoanuts, and the rush
of all to get them, much as their descendants now play football. Some
of the younger ones amused themselves by racing up and down the trees
trying to catch one another, and occasionally shaking each other from
the branches. One little girl had caught a skunk which she was trying to
feed with figs, to the great disgust of the skunk. All had apparently
forgotten the absent ones; for the memory of our first ancestors was
short, not having yet been exercised on history.

“I told you to drop that skunk,” said an old woman, “and had you minded
me you would not now be sneezing and spitting so violently. Go down to
the spring and wash yourself.”

Just then a cocoanut flying through the air, struck the woman in the
eye, and for a moment she did not know whether it was the odor from the
skunk, or a ball from the players that knocked her down.

“I told you to be careful with your cocoanuts,” she said, “and had you
minded me you would not get this shaking;” at which she seized the
nearest player by the hair and administered several pulls and scratches.

Finally Koree made his appearance, leading Orlee by the hand. His first
anxiety was to know whether Sosee had returned, whom he was alarmed not
to see among the players. The mother of Orlee ran franticly to receive
her child, which she fondled with an incoherent chattering.

“Where is Sosee?” asked Koree.

“Where is Sosee?” asked the mother at the same time.

Both looked at each other in amazement, and no words were needed to
express their mutual disappointment.

“Have you restored to me one child only to lose another?” asked the
mother reproachfully.

“Have I lost a lover,” replied Koree, “only to rescue a baby?”

Both, forgetful of what they had, were about to quarrel over what they
had not. Koree, however, was the more inconsolable, because he had lost
all that he went for, which he had, indeed, before starting, and went
to retain rather than to acquire. For he went for Sosee rather than for
Orlee, seeking the latter only that he might not lose the former.

“Wait,” said Gimbo, the grandfather of Sosee, “and she may yet return.
She is doubtless in the swamp detained by some attraction or difficulty.”

“Sosee, unincumbered and swift of foot,” replied Koree, “would not
be longer in returning than I with the child. She has either been
re-captured by the Lali, or else met with a disaster in the swamp.
Perhaps the lion I saw chasing the tapirs devoured her;” and he grieved
like Pyramus mourning for Thisbe.

Little did he think that at that moment she was the cause of a quarrel
between Oboo and Ilo in the far off land of the Lali. The mother was less
concerned, both because she was in the first joys of receiving a restored
child, and because, in addition to the uncertainty as to whether Sosee
would not return, it was not customary for our ancestors of that day
to concern themselves about their grown children. When their offspring
had passed the disabilities of infancy, they were allowed to shift for
themselves. Orlee, being still a child, was, therefore, dearer to the
mother than Sosee; and so, measurably content with the former, she was
willing to trust the other to her lover or herself.

When Koree, however, became satisfied that Sosee was lost, he resolved
to find her; and, as his fears early persuaded him that she was lost
(since fear acts faster in the absence and confidence in the presence of
lovers,) he resolved at once to get up an expedition for her recapture.

To set all doubt at rest about her whereabouts, some neutral monkeys, who
had recently visited the Lali in a migration southward, now came to the
Ammi. They informed the latter that the chief talk among the Lali was
about the capture of a beautiful girl, and the quarrel of two apes over
her possession. They said also that they heard it intimated among the
Lali, that as the girls of the Ammi were more beautiful than those of the
Lali, they had a project to capture more of them.

Armed with this information and these threats, Koree now went about to
rouse the infant race of men to arms. Rumor went before him, and that
which had been a hint soon became an assertion. Horrid tales of captured
maidens filled the imaginations of Cocoanut Hill. The young women were
especially interested, some hoping they would escape capture, and others
that they would not. The old men and women were indifferent, especially
as babies were not to be captured. But the young men were easily aroused,
especially those who had lovers, and they determined to defend their own.

A league was, therefore, entered into by the young men of the Ammi, which
the older men soon after joined, to proceed, like the united princes of
Greece, to recapture the stolen maiden and restore her to this earlier
Menelaus. Another and older siege of Troy was thus planned, which, like
many battles greater than Homer’s, was lost to history, and can now be
restored only by meager relics saved from the past.

Let us then proceed, Homer-like, to build up the history of this war,
as the mammoth has been rebuilt by putting together here and there a
bone, and as Roman history has been constructed by inspecting coins and
broken statues. Greater battles are lost than any that are retained in
history. The greatest throes of earth and of its inhabitants have escaped
even tradition, and are now to be exhumed only from the forgotten.
We dig up history as we do potatoes, and wonder that so much activity
has been buried. History is now built from this end, and long periods
of forgetfulness are being reclaimed. Like the bridges which span the
Mississippi, we throw up great highways across prehistoric periods, and
prospect in times and lands beyond the known.




 


[Illustration]

Busy now were the preparations for dire war. Not that troops were to be
armed, or supplies collected for a long campaign. No vessels were to be
fitted out to cross the Swamp, or ambulances prepared for the wounded.
No loans were to be negotiated or preliminaries of diplomacy settled.
The early men were always ready for war, in fact were always at war. One
of the first advances of mankind was made when wars were separated from
peace, and men observed the difference. As yet war was the natural state,
and never had to be declared. Whenever a man met an ape, or even a wild
beast, the signal was given for a fight. The race had not yet learned
peace, which had to be learned before war, the arts of peace being all of
later development. Men had fists before they had plows, and took their
food before they produced it.

But the Ammi were, nevertheless, busy with preparations for war. Those
are often busiest who have least to do. The excitement made them active,
and they rushed about impatient to begin the fray. They had not yet
learned to wait, or to take time for things. To resolve was, as yet, to
commence. Unaccustomed to those great achievements which require time for
preparation, they would enter into a long war as quickly as into a single
battle. Had they found their enemy they would have fought that day. The
battle generally comes too late for savages, the impulse for war being
expended before the fight begins.

Still a few things had to be prepared. While they expected to get their
rations from the Swamp, and to rely on some stone heap for weapons, they
remembered that in the few years of their separate life as Men they had
accumulated some wealth. This it was thought best to protect. They had
large quantities of cocoanuts and other fruits in their dens; they had
made some valuable instruments of stones and shells; their dug-outs
themselves were worth much to them, and would likely be destroyed in
their absence; for all which reasons some of the older men opposed the
project of war; for wealth is always a promoter of peace.

“It is better to keep our caves and cocoanuts,” said Oko, a stingy
fellow, “then to get back a girl.”

Their very position in the Cocoanut Hill region was deemed valuable on
account of its abundant fruits and its nearness to the Swamp with its
game. They found it advisable, therefore, to protect their homes and
country, and for that purpose determined to leave some at home. They
learned also that some of their implements might be used in war, or
rather recalled the fact, since they were first invented for purposes
of war; and it took some time to select what they wanted and to provide
for its transportation. Some, not accustomed to hunt, or not liking the
products of the Swamp, concluded to take with them the sweetest nuts
and juiciest fruits of the Cocoanut Hill region, while others were busy
determining the best route to the other side of the Swamp.

These things required activity, and men and women were accordingly busy
preparing for war. For the warriors were not confined to men. There were
amazons before there were belles. Woman’s equality in public affairs
was recognized before her inferiority, and equal rights were as yet the
law of the race. Instead of leaving the women behind to protect their
homes, they concluded to leave the old and the children behind, while
the able-bodied of both sexes were all to go to the field. Oko, the
stingy fellow just mentioned, proposed to kill off the non-combatants, as
they would eat all the cocoanuts before the warriors should return, and
perhaps not let the latter again have possession of their homes.

“You greedy ape,” replied one to this suggestion, “you have not yourself
gathered all the fruit you now have; you took some from others’ dens.
I saw in your hole a wedge which I made for myself, and a marrow bone
sharpened by a woman. You would now like to kill them lest they get back
what you stole from them.”

At this the avaricious ape, Oko, threw a cocoanut shell at the speaker,
but took care that it was an empty one, for he was so economical, since
he had begun the collection of nuts, that he never wasted anything.

The other threw back a filled cocoanut at him, and knocked him down. His
generosity in using a whole nut served him a good turn, for liberality
is necessary in war, where one may be too stingy even to fight, and lose
a battle because he begrudges the price of the weapon. Oko picked up the
cocoanut, and—kept it. The Ammi now expected a desperate struggle between
the two men; but, one being satisfied with his victory and the other with
his gain, they parted, one going off with an air of triumph, and the
other with a cocoanut.

Other disputes arose over various details in the conduct of the war, but
none broke out into violence.

“Whose girl will Sosee be if we get her back?” asked one.

“Mine!” replied Koree, defiantly.

“Are we all to fight, and only one to get the advantage of it?” asked
another.

“You must fight,” retorted Koree, “or you will lose all you have. The
restoration of my girl means the protection of yours.”

“If I capture her,” replied a third, “neither Koree nor any one else will
get her. A girl, like a cocoanut, belongs to whomsoever gets her.”

“Whoever gets her,” replied Koree, “will get a broken head if he does not
restore her to me.”

It was now feared that this altercation would lead to a civil war before
the foreign war should commence; when the thoughts of the company were
turned by the suggestion of Oko, the stingy fellow mentioned, that the
Lali had doubtless acquired some possessions, so that they would all
return laden with the spoils of war.

“If it were not so,” he added, “I would not fight at all.”

“Perhaps,” suggested one of the young men, “there are also some
pretty apes among them, so that instead of one girl we may bring back
many—enough for all.”

“Sosee must be recovered first,” said Koree, “when I will help you to
catch all the rest.”

Some, however, could not be made to understand what the war was for.

“I can see no cocoanuts in it,” said one.

“I don’t want my eyes scratched out,” added another, who had lately
become interested in a girl who was sitting beside him; “nor do I want
her injured.”

“Who knows,” asked a third, “if we shall ever meet again? I fear we shall
lose this place and lose one another.”

“Why did Koree lose his girl?” asked another. “He should not have taken
her into danger.”

“Men and warriors!” interposed Koree at this point, fearing an
insubordination that might be disastrous, “is this your resolution? A
little while ago you were impatient for battle. Now you are seeking
excuses for peace. None of you are worthy of such honor as awaits us.
The defeat of the Lali will give glory to the Ammi, and many women and
stores. We will divide their country among us, or, at least, have no more
trouble from them. You fight not for me only but for yourselves, and
fight that you may have to fight no more. For, this war will destroy
all our enemies. Now swear to me not only that you will go to the war
(for that you have already done), but that you will never abandon it till
Sosee is restored.”

This they all swore by scratching their ribs, and again there was harmony
in the counsels of war.




 


[Illustration]

The war being resolved upon, preparations now went on, and consumed so
much time that many again lost interest. They grew impatient, first at
the preparations, and then at the expected war itself, and so had to be
repeatedly stirred up by new infusions of resolution. Koree superintended
the preparations, whose chief work was to keep the minds of the people
prepared; for our early ancestors could not hold a resolution as long as
we. Their anger was soon cool, like their love, and their attention went
rapidly from one subject to another.

“Hollow out some water-melons,” said Koree, “in which to carry our
weapons.”

The Ammi had used melon rinds for vessels, when they wanted something
larger than a cocoanut shell. These lasted, indeed, but a short time, but
they were easily replaced.

“Water-melons are too heavy,” said one, “and will spoil before we reach
the enemy. Let us use bark which can be tied at the ends and hung over
our shoulders.”

Some, accordingly, took bark, but many preferred melons or gourds,
which, however, they exchanged for bark before proceeding far. It takes
experience to learn what is best for war or peace.

“Sharpen your clubs,” said Koree, “but only at one end. Let the other end
be blunt, so as to serve for a staff in marching and a weapon in battle.”

They accordingly sharpened their clubs, which served as spears, and also
aided them in digging for roots, clams and other provisions.

They also provided split bones and broken cocoanut shells, which were
sharp, and so served both as weapons to cut and implements to dig.

Some thought of still other things which might be useful in war, and
filled their bark knapsacks with so much that, when they were ready to
start they were so hopelessly overloaded that they could scarcely move.
But they gained experience on the way, and soon learned what to leave
as well as what to take, thus acquiring early the soldier’s virtue of
learning to throw away.

The greedy fellow Oko, already mentioned, wanted them to carry all their
stores with them, and he tried to get others to help carry his.

“We helped you gather those stores,” said one, “and will not serve you
again by carrying them after you have taken them from us.”

“I did not take them by force,” he answered.

“No,” replied the first, “because you would not fight; but you stole
them, or persuaded us to give them to you.”

“I always gave you something in exchange.”

“True, but it was in each case something worth less.”

Oko was the first man that had learned to cheat, his avariciousness being
distorted into dishonesty which easily deceived them, since men, though
they early learned to resist force, were slow to withstand guile.

Being unable to get help in carrying his stores he concluded to stay at
home to watch them, when the thought of getting greater stores from the
Lali again changed his mind; and his voice was now for war.

The preparations thus went on, and all seemed propitious for a successful
campaign, when suddenly a tremendous shock was felt. A mountain range in
the distance rose to the sky, forming a ridge of the Alps. A roar such
as has not since visited the earth reverberated through the country,
shaking the air as violently as the first shock shook the earth. The
world rocked to and fro like a vessel at sea, tumbling every man to the
earth, and rolling him over the ground. It was impossible to stand, or
even to lie still. The whole human race became sea sick, and all were, in
addition, more frightened than sick. Down came the dug-outs with their
contents over the heads of the Ammi, and men and provisions were rolled
promiscuously over the ground. Fruits and nuts fell from the trees, and
many trees fell with them. There seemed to be no safety for anything on
the earth, or even for the earth itself. The land appeared to be going,
and all looked for a general collapse.

[Illustration: THE CATASTROPHE.]

To add to the disaster the Swamp overflowed, and its waters rushed over
the settlement of the Ammi, overwhelming everything except the huts that
stood on high ground. Several of the men, and many of the women and
children, who had escaped being scared to death, were finally drowned;
while reptiles and wild beasts again overran the region of the Ammi. All
Alligator Swamp seemed emptied upon Cocoanut Hill, and the infant race
looked to see their country, like Holland, sink out of sight.

The return of the waves was scarcely less disastrous than their advance.
As the earth settled again, and the flood came down from the hills, it
swept away much that the advance had left. The earth for a long time
swayed back and forth, the waters rushing alternately in each direction.
Many of the Ammi escaped only by running into the trees, some of whom
even then were shaken down into the water. To add to the terror the sky
became dark, the sun being entirely hid by the thick clouds of dust and
smoke which issued from the crevices of the earth. Noises were repeatedly
heard as of great explosions, and, following every rest from the rocking
of the earth, was a shaking up by intermittent convulsions. The birds
did not find even the air still enough for flight, but many fell to the
ground (or water) killed by the concussion. None knew when the next burst
would occur, but all looked for their death, uncertain only whether it
would come by fire, water, or engulfment. Thunder seemed to come from
both the earth and sky, and lightnings flashed out from the rents of the
earth as well as of the clouds. The world at times appeared to be on
fire, and it looked as if it would be burned up in case it should escape
all the other means of destruction. The sun, the moon, and the stars
seemed all to be destroyed, and no human being looked again for light
except from the fire of the destruction of all things. Death was expected
to follow this disaster, in which men and animals alike were to take part.

In the midst of this despair, however, hope arose with the stillness that
came as sudden as had the commotion. The earth seemed again to stand. The
thunderings became quiet; the waters rushed back to their places; light
began to appear through the smoke, and in time the sun was seen to be in
his place. The distant mountain ranges again appeared in sight, but much
changed. Some peaks were gone, or lay in heaps about the ranges, while
new ridges arose where the plain had before stretched. A new earth seemed
to greet the sky; the old horizon was gone, and a new sky-line along the
mountains added grandeur as well as novelty to the changed scene.

For a moment the impression prevailed that the earth was not permanent,
but changeable like the sea, the forest, and the men. The globe was at
this time passing through a crisis as decisive as that of the human race,
preparing for our present physical geography as well as our present
society; and we may be excused for turning aside, for a moment, from
the convulsions of the human mind in its preparations for war, to the
physical convulsions of Nature in preparing the earth itself for its
future uses.




 


[Illustration]

The smoke, the noise, the fire and the water having cleared away, the
Ammi were now discussing the earthquake. They had forgot their war
preparations in the presence of a greater enemy than the Lali. They had
to make peace with the World. What had happened? Will it occur again?
These were among the questions they asked.

“I do not see that we made much by coming down from the trees,” said one.
“The earth is just as unstable as the trees, and shakes as much as they.
I should have been thrown off many times had there been any place to fall
to.”

“Had we kept to the trees,” observed another, “we should have had more
experience in holding on. I got thrown down and rolled about, because I
had nothing to hold to. When the ground rocks it is more violent than a
palm or a pine.”

“It all comes,” said Gimbo, the grandfather of Sosee, “from walking
upright. If the Apes had kept on all fours, they would not have been
thrown to the ground. Nobody can stand on his hind legs alone, in such a
shaking. While the rest of you tumbled I remained on my four feet. Men
need to walk solidly, and nothing gives a firmer foundation than four
feet. No elephant is fool enough to walk on two; and men, by keeping two
of their feet in the air, are always falling. It was a great mistake to
get up from the ground. Other animals have not done it. Men were made to
go on all fours. Everything they want is on the ground, and they can see
it better when looking down than when looking up. Their eyes are thus
nearer what they are hunting, and they are not in danger of stumbling
when they are looking at their feet.”

Another thought that the horror occurred because they were too
irreligious. They had been neglecting their ceremonies, and there
was general doubt about the traditions of Shoozoo. “It is a divine
visitation,” he said, and he was in favor of sacrificing something.

Another said: “It was the voice of the great winged Alligator, with which
Shoozoo fought. Chained under the Swamp this beast shook himself, which
caused the waters to flow over these regions. The fire and smoke which he
blew from his mouth, caused all the damage. He swallowed up the sun and
stars for awhile, and the mountains which he carried off he has not yet
returned. I think we should propitiate him, or he will come again.”

[Illustration: THE FIGHT WITH THE FIRE MONSTER.]

The fire, which some had never before seen, or only vaguely observed in
the lightning or a distant volcano, proved the greatest terror of all,
as it was the greatest mystery. They saw it creeping through the grass,
destroying scattered pieces of wood, as well as flaming in various
parts of the forest. They thought it was a great serpent, and tried to
kill it by throwing clubs at it, which it in turn devoured; when they
declared that it was a monster that fed on wood, and ate whole forests.
Some thought that it was the sun that had broken loose from the sky, and
fallen in pieces to the earth; because, in addition to its light, they
felt its heat. All were inclined to worship it as a divinity, some saying
that it was Shoozoo himself.

“It is some kind of snake,” said one, “and I never yet saw a snake that I
could not strangle;” whereat he seized a burning brand, which he took to
be the body of the serpent, and tried to squeeze it to death. He dropped
it quickly, however, with a loud scream, saying that it had bit him. He
then jumped on the fire, thinking to crush the monster, when the sparks
flew up in great numbers, frightening all who were present, and igniting
the hair of the assailant, who was soon rushing about in flames.

“There is a fight between him and the monster,” said one; “let us see
which will whip.”

The man was soon burned to death and his body nearly consumed, at which
great terror seized the rest.

They called the monster the Sun-serpent, and for a long time, whenever
fire appeared, they avoided it, or prayed to it, to avert its wrath. When
it lightened they were afraid, and prayed that it would remain in the
sky, and not come to the earth. They regarded the thunder as its voice;
and when it struck a tree or destroyed a forest, they said it had come
down to take a meal. In time, as they got more familiar with it, they
took to feeding it with wood, to appease its hunger, and prevent it from
devouring them or their possessions. When it went out, they thought it
had crawled into the earth, like any other snake, and rarely was anybody
bold enough to try to dig it out, or even to approach its hole. When
they saw it flying through the air, as in lightning or a falling star,
they predicted some great calamity, and were exceptionally religious.
They pointed to the many thunder storms and to the damage done by the
lightning and rain as evidence of all this; for these disturbances were
all more frequent and violent in the Tertiary Age than at any subsequent
time, the air being never for a long time either clear or silent.

There was, in short, so much that the early race did not understand, that
they were perpetually in awe. Every convulsion of nature was a subject of
worship to them. They thought it was alive, or produced by some living
monster, and they feared its wrath and tried to appease it. Earth-quakes
soon got a name, and were placed among the divinities. Thunder,
Lightning, Rain, Hail, and subsequently Snow were canonized as heavenly
spirits. The wind was the breath of Shoozoo, or of his great Alligator.
Sunshine came to be the smile of the Great Serpent, when he was in good
humor. The air came soon to be as full of monsters as the earth, and
men’s imagination saw more than their eyes. A spirit world had dawned
upon them, and the supernatural began to rule the race. All the unknown
was fashioned into gods, and the realm of ignorance became one of terror
and devotion.

“It all comes,” persisted Gimbo, “from looking up. If people only walked
on their four feet they would not see the sky and its fires. I never see
anything that is high, and so am not made afraid. The cure for all these
evils is to return to all fours, when you won’t see anything that is so
far off that it does not concern you.”

“But you see more snakes, and are more frightened by them than we,”
retorted one.

“Snakes must be seen before you have to do with them,” replied Gimbo; “if
they see you first you don’t come off so well. By keeping my eyes on the
ground, I see them before they harm me, and soon they are out of the way,
or I am. When your first acquaintance with a snake is made by tramping
on him, there is a disagreeable surprise and a dangerous controversy.
But it is not so with the Sun-serpent or the Alligator of Shoozoo, which
you are always seeing and which never comes near; so that you are always
frightened when there is no danger.”

A long religious controversy then ensued, which turned mainly on whether
men should keep to the ways and traditions of their fathers, and walk,
like them, on all fours, or whether they should stand up and look ahead.
The latter course was thought to unsettle their faith and make them
introduce new gods, if not to abandon entirely their religion. Gimbo
thought there were swamp snakes enough to engage men’s attention,
without troubling themselves about snakes in the air. “Shoozoo’s
Alligator,” he said, “is a literal swamp reptile, and that is enough to
worship. By introducing new snakes into our theology, you will confuse
all our religion.”

Others, however, were not as conservative as Gimbo, but believed in
acknowledging snakes wherever they found them. Religion is naturally
progressive, they thought, and advancement in religion at this time was
believed to consist in adding more snakes to theology.

While, therefore, Gimbo represented the Unitarians, or Mono-snakists,
who claimed that there was only one great snake god—the Alligator of
Shoozoo—there was a polytheistic, or poly-snake, party, which insisted on
a many-snaked Pantheon, and particularly on a belief in the sun-snake and
the wood-eating snake, which were thought by many to be one and the same;
while still others thought that these, with the Alligator of Shoozoo,
formed together a trinity of snakes which were in substance all one, but
manifested themselves under the three forms of Sun-light, Wood-fire and
Alligator.




 


[Illustration]

There had up to this time been many sects in the religion of the Ammi.
They all agreed simply in recognizing Shoozoo as its founder, and his
fight with the Alligator as the great transaction on which it rested.
There was early, however, a schism in the main body. One class had
drifted away from the worship of Shoozoo to the worship of his Alligator,
and in time they claimed that the Alligator was the god, instead of
Shoozoo. This came from their habit of using the alligator, or figures
representing it, as symbols of the Shoozoo religion, whereby the symbol
became in time more important than the thing symbolized. There were,
accordingly, in the Shoozoo religion, the pure Shoozoo party and the
Alligator party, and for nearly a generation a fierce controversy raged
between the two, resulting often in bloodshed.

The Alligator party, however, triumphed in the end, and many of the pure
Shoozooists were exiled, and have since lived among the Lali and other
apes, where they have continued to worship Shoozoo without any mixture
of the Alligator, and have converted back some of the Apes to their faith.

In time, however, the Alligator party came to be divided among
themselves, as the outgrowth of the same spirit. They accustomed
themselves to use, as the symbol of the Alligator, a dragon-fly (for the
alligator vanquished by Shoozoo was admitted to be a flying alligator
which somewhat resembled a dragon-fly), and by many the dragon-fly came
at length to be taken for the Alligator and to be worshipped as such.
A fight accordingly arose between the pure Alligator party and the
dragon-fly party that waxed more bitter than the original fight between
the Alligator party and the Shoozoo party. The dragon-fly party were in
the end victorious, and the Alligator party were slain or banished as
heretics, just as the pure Shoozoo party had been.

There was soon after this a like division among the successful Dragon-fly
party, and from a like cause. The people, finding it difficult to draw a
dragon-fly, represented it by a cross, or two lines drawn transversely,
the longer one representing the body of the fly, and the shorter one
its wings. This symbol, which was soon seen on all the utensils of the
Ammi, and frequently carved on trees and rocks, especially during the
controversy with the Alligator party, came at length to be taken for
the dragon-fly, and worshipped in its stead. This abuse was deplored
by some of the Ammi, who tried to recall the people to the worship of
the dragon-fly itself, and not its symbol. Others, however, had become
attached to the cross, and soon there was a violent controversy between
the dragon-fly party and the cross party, and the dragon-fly party fought
the cross party more than they had both together fought the Alligator
party. The cross party were successful, however, and the dragon-fly party
were compelled to keep quiet; for by this time they had learned the first
rudiments of religious tolerance, and stopped killing and banishing the
dissenters, provided only that they would not preach their doctrines in
public, or attempt to disturb the established faith.

Soon, however, the cross party was rent with dissensions, one class
insisting on worshiping the long beam of the cross, and the other
the short beam; and there was soon the long-beam cross party and the
short-beam cross party in the church, and the long-beam party fought
the short-beam party more than the whole cross party had before fought
the dragon-fly party. The short-beam party insisted at last on making
the short beam as long as the long beam, forming something like a Greek
Cross, which finally came to be their symbol, while the long-beam party
came in time to omit the short beam altogether and use only a one-beam
cross; and they took as their symbol a straight line.

The short-beam cross party, however, were successful, and they greatly
persecuted the long-beam party, though with less severity than their
predecessors had done, because the spirit of religious liberty was always
in the ascendant.

The short-beam cross party, however, soon broke up into other sects owing
to disputes about the nature and form of the short-beam cross, which
gave the long-beam cross party (which had at length become the one-beam
cross party) an opportunity to urge its claims, and there was a reaction
among the short-beam cross party in favor of the long-beam cross party,
which gained many converts, and at one time threatened the disruption of
the short-beam cross party; and it would doubtless have accomplished this
but for a great reformation which now swept over the religious world of
the Ammi.

This was a movement in favor of restoring the primitive religion of
Shoozoo, or the worship of the Alligator. It was led by one Lookoo,
who was afterwards known as the Great Reformer. With a fiery zeal and
vigorous eloquence he called the attention of the Ammi to the fact
they had got away entirely from their original faith, which was in the
Alligator, and, instead, were worshipping short crosses and long crosses.

“Neither short crosses nor long crosses,” said he, “are anything, but
only alligators. Not even a dragon-fly will avail you, but only the
original Alligator of Shoozoo, who occupies the Swamp and flies through
the air. He gives us warmth in the sun, and comes to the earth in
lightning to punish his enemies. He is the Lord of the Ammi, and will put
to flight the Lali and all monkeys beyond the Swamp. He led our fathers
out from the Apes, gave us Cocoanut Hill, taught us to make darts and
wedges, and led us to build houses. Our gathered fruits are due to his
guidance, and by his jaws the reptiles of the great forest are kept
in fear. Return, then, to your allegiance to the great Alligator, the
companion of Shoozoo and equal deity with him.”

Lookoo gained many adherents, not only because it was evident to all the
Ammi that they had departed from their god for his successive symbols,
but because the priests of the short-beam cross religion had established
the custom of drinking all the milk in the Cocoanut, which they had
taught the rest of the Ammi that it was sacrilege for anybody to drink
but the priests. The reformation, accordingly, gained headway out of a
desire on the part of the common people to get some of this milk, as well
as out of a change in theological convictions. There was a general demand
for reform, and some of the worst, as well as some of the best men, were
active in the movement. The priests made the principal opposition to it,
although a few of them, in the hope of preferment, or because they had a
grievance against the other priests, joined the new movement and became
its leaders.

The reformation was generally successful. Some, however, refused to be
led away by it, but became more devoted than ever to the short-beam cross
worship, and cultivated such a devotion for the short-beam cross as had
never been known. They were commonly known as the clerical or priestly
party, and constituted the conservatives until the time of the great
earthquake just mentioned. They insisted on retaining all that their
ancestors had handed down to them, the very fact that it had come from
antiquity being evidence of its truth; while the Reformers claimed the
right of going back to original sources and re-establishing themselves on
the truth of the great Alligator.

The tendency to skepticism and the introduction of new gods, deplored by
Lookoo, as well as the explanation of the Alligator and other theological
truths as phenomena of nature—fire, earthquake, wind, etc.—has generally
been found among the Reformers, who early tried to explain all religion
away, or else resolve it into natural causes and effects.




 


[Illustration]

Among the Lali the religion of Shoozoo was preserved in greater purity.
There had not been such a great departure from Shoozoo himself, as among
the Ammi, where he was entirely lost in his symbols. Neither had there
been so many splits and reformations. The Apes preserved the unity of the
church better than the Men.

Instead, however, of losing Shoozoo in the Alligator, like the Ammi, and
then losing the Alligator in the dragon-fly, and the dragon-fly in the
cross, and the cross in the short beam of the cross, the Lali went to
the opposite extreme of deifying and worshiping not only Shoozoo, but
everything connected with him. Before one generation had passed Shoozoo’s
wife, Simlee, was admitted to equal divinity with him, and it was known
as the Shoozoo-Simlee religion. There was thus a male and female deity,
or king and queen of heaven. Soon after this Shoozoo’s parents and
children were likewise added to the divine family, and worshiped by the
Apes. Next came the dart with which Shoozoo struck the moon, and finally
the moon itself.

Everything was deemed sacred with which Shoozoo had to do, except the
Alligator, which the Apes persistently refused to worship, because the
Ammi had taken it up. They claimed, instead, that Shoozoo had killed
the alligator in order to take the swallowed moon out of it. Many
relics of the dead alligator, indeed, were furnished, and kept as a
perpetual testimony to the achievements of Shoozoo, and as a rebuke to
the unbelieving Ammi, who dared to worship it. These relics were worn as
charms, and many cures were alleged to have been effected by them. Among
others the gallant Oboo had been cured of a violent disease. The Swamp in
which the Alligator was killed was deemed sacred, and in their devotions
the Lali turned their faces to it. Water from this Swamp was likewise
deemed sacred, and was always kept on the altars of the Apes, and great
devotion was paid to it when exposed to the sight of the worshippers.
Forty apes were once killed for sacrilege committed by spilling water,
most of them for being mere witnesses of the outrage. A drop of Swamp
water was put on every Ape’s head when he was born, and the ceremony was
often repeated through life. This water was used in the consecration of
their priests, and its application once turned the scales of war. Its
appearance was consulted for omens, and it was invoked by monkeys when
about to go after fruits. Bad luck was attributed to certain disturbances
of it. Water-songs were the first specimens of music known to the Apes,
and were always sung at exhibitions of water taken from the Swamp. The
finest gourds and cocoanut vessels were made to hold this water, and
the decoration of these was the first step taken in Sacred Art. Among
the first pictures sketched were crude representations of a stream.
They called their children after this water, such being the meaning of
the common names among them. “Ilo” signifies “touched with water,” and
“Oboo” means “Soaked.” Rainy days were deemed more sacred than clear
ones, on account of their water, whose descent from the skies was taken
as influences from Shoozoo. A flood was regarded as this god coming in
disguise; and to be drowned was to be lost in Shoozoo. The Lali washed
oftener than the Ammi, not for cleanliness, but on account of their
devotion to water; and they would not kill a snake that was still wet.
As long as anything, indeed, had upon it water from the great Swamp, it
was supposed to be under the protection of Shoozoo. The Apes drank water
before eating, and the last thing they did when dying was to drink. To be
deprived of water for certain rites was the most serious affliction that
could happen to an Ape, and a rebellion once broke out among the Lali
because, when on a long march, their leader would not go out of the way
to find a stream for ceremonial purposes.

But the refinements of ritual among the Lali were not confined to water,
although at the time of which we speak the water rites had attained
their greatest ascendancy. The Apes were accustomed to make pilgrimages
to Cocoanut Hill where Shoozoo performed his great exploits, which was
regarded as Holy Ground, and there they often worshipped. It was the
interference of the Ammi with these privileges that led to the quarrels
between the Apes and the Men, of which we have spoken. The Ammi, however,
claimed that the Apes came not for religious purposes, but to steal
cocoanuts, and hence the reprisals already mentioned.

One of the rules of the Lali religion was to kill screech owls when the
moon was quarter full, because it was at this period that Shoozoo had
killed the owls of Cocoanut Hill, and all owl hunts were in commemoration
of his great exploit. Another was to hide their darts for six days
after this festival, because during this time Shoozoo rested from his
hunt and needed no more owls. Another observance was to present snakes
to one another at a certain period in honor of the great serpent which
Shoozoo killed and presented to Simlee. For days before this festival
the young monkeys were kept busy hunting snakes in the great Swamp.
Another requirement was that on the day before Owl-hunt the Lali should
walk upright as a preparation for the great festival, since on this day
Shoozoo walked upright to aim at the moon. They were forbidden to take
fish from the great Swamp on Snake Day, though they might then take them
from other waters. No monkey must kill another during these festivals,
as this right was reserved to the priests alone, who must, however, use
their victims only in sacrifice.

Departure from these rules was punished by being plunged in the Great
Swamp to wash away the guilt. The sinner was kept under as long as the
celebrant deemed fit; and if he survived he was said to be reconciled
to Shoozoo, and if not he was deemed incapable of purification and
deservedly dead. There were other penalties for small offenders. Most
of the offences among the Lali were religious violations, and the
punishment was in the hands of the priests, which had much to do with the
preservation of the unity of religion. Sin was recognized before wrong,
nonconformity before crime, and ecclesiastical penalties before civil.
Frequent attempts were made to throw off the tyranny of the priesthood,
but the leaders of the revolt were quickly apprehended, and usually put
to death with great tortures. Heresies were not infrequent among the
Apes, who soon learned, however, that it was not policy to make them
known. In general there was a remarkable unanimity among them—a greater
degree than has since been known in religious affairs.

Among the maxims of the Lali, which were also current among the Ammi,
(for, notwithstanding their religious differences, their morality was
substantially the same), were the following:

Keep your snout in your own cocoanut.

Never bite off an ear in sport.

Stick to the tree you are climbing.

Don’t fight over what you don’t want.

Save what you can’t eat, remembering that you must eat again.

Don’t crack your cocoanuts on each other’s heads.

Half the time spent in washing that you spend in scratching would keep
you more comfortable.

Don’t man the Ammi, (which among the Ammi reads, “Don’t ape the Lali.”)

Get up a tree rather than dispute the ground with a tiger.

If you don’t pick your neighbor’s fleas you will be bit by your own fleas.

After this digression on the religion and morality of the Lali, we will
return to the affairs of the Ammi.




 


[Illustration]

Having repaired the damage of the earthquake and flood, the Ammi set out
on their march to the country of the Lali, having, first, however, armed
themselves with the light weapons and provisions already mentioned. The
expedition was led by Koree, who labored hard to remove every obstacle,
and he set an example of endurance, as well as infused courage in the
irresolute.

“We start out for Sosee and glory,” he said. “The time will come when we
will delight to recall the difficulties which now trouble us.”

They marched more around the Swamp than through it, keeping, however,
near its borders. This was a longer route, but fraught with less danger
and difficulty. At night they retired to the Swamp, lest they should be
surprised by the Lali, and when they became hungry they scattered to
collect food, of which there was great abundance. The earthquake shock
and the floods had shaken the fruits and nuts from the trees, where they
could now readily be gathered.

Oko, the greedy fellow mentioned, suggested that they collect stores for
the whole campaign, and take them along, since they might not find fruits
so abundant as they proceeded. “There is plenty in the Swamp,” replied
Koree, who had recently passed that way. “The whole region between the
Ammi and the Tali abounds with things to eat. Let us not, therefore,
burden ourselves with what we may gather as we need it.”

[Illustration: THE GREEDY OKO.]

Determined, therefore, to forage as they went, and so to live at the
expense of beasts and reptiles, they proceeded on their march for several
days almost uninterrupted. They moved slowly, planning the details of
their campaign as they went.

Among those who took part in this expedition, and were prominent in the
counsels and events that followed, were these:

First was Cocoanut Scooper, the great hunter of the hills, who, if not
fierce in battle with wild beasts, was no less esteemed because of his
services in procuring provisions. He had scoured all the country round
about, and knew every tree and the quality of its fruit. He could at a
distance distinguish a palm, a walnut, a fig and a cinnamon tree; from
the appearance of a region he knew its value as a source of supplies; he
was expert in finding thickets where rabbits and other game abounded,
and he learned all the shoals of the Swamp where crabs and clams could
be taken. This man had charge of the commissaries, and looked out for
provisions for the expedition. During all their march his eye was on the
foliage of the forest, rather than on the trail of the Apes, looking for
something to eat rather than to fight.

Next was Fire-tamer, the bright-eyed hunter who took prisoner the
red-winged beast that feeds on wood, and, having caught him in his
lightning errand to earth, kept him a captive in the camp of the Ammi,
feeding him on brush and bark, and confining him within an earthen mound.
The all-devouring monster could not be satiated, but, after consuming all
the wood they could carry him, died when they stopped feeding him.

Next in valor and wise in counsel was Spread-mouth, the first man that
was known to laugh. His associates observed the changing size of his
mouth, which took as many dimensions as the chameleon took colors, and
was seen to be biggest when he was with women. Others learned to imitate
him, which was at first thought to detract, and then to add, to their
beauty, until, at the time of which we speak, half of the Ammi had
learned to laugh, but many of them awkwardly. The first laughs of men
were hardly distinguishable from grins and growls, and many indulged in
them unwillingly because of the huge teeth they displayed, which called
forth shudders rather than responsive smiles. They who laughed, laughed
alone, and not for many generations did a whole company join in laughter
together. As there was little wit to encourage laughter, the habit was
of slow growth, and its indulgence promoted quarreling rather than good
humor, because of the defiant appearance of the laugher. Only when men
became acquainted with laughter did they learn to like it, and not to
resent it. This great Spread-mouth was, therefore, long the terror and
the puzzle of the Ammi.

Next in honor and influence was the great jawed and big-fisted Pounder,
whose mouth and hands were a double terror to his enemies. He scorned to
fight with clubs or sharpened stones, but thought himself sufficiently
armed by nature to meet his enemy, whether man, or ape, or wild beast.
He had fought the woolly Rhinoceros and Cave Bear; he had climbed after
wild cats, and fought in the Swamp with alligators. Pounder had a long,
narrow head, with retreating forehead, and great jaws filled with oblique
teeth, which struck terror into an enemy. He was woolly-haired, being
covered with coarse, dark-brown bunches of hair over his whole body, and
a beard of lighter color. His arms were long, reaching almost to the
ground, so that he could walk as well as fight with them, using sometimes
one and sometimes both. They were powerful, whether to hold an object or
deal a blow. His legs were short and thin, with undeveloped calves, and
he walked half erect with in-bent knees, carrying a huge body that was
ever ready for assault. He was impatient to reach the enemy, and at times
quarreled with his friends that he might have somebody to fight. Pounder
was more useful in war than in peace; and had not this conflict broken
out to make him a hero, he would have been killed as a criminal.

A very different man from this, one shrewd in counsel and valiant in war,
was Abroo, known also as Family-Man. He had kept to one woman for years,
and kept together the children born to them, so that they constituted a
family. The children of his children were also recognized, and they, with
his other relatives were bound together in a kind of clan. He favored
this group, and sought to gain every advantage for it from the other
men. They kept their fruits together, and lived in common. A few others
were, indeed, admitted to their number, and all together they formed a
“set,” and the social distinction thus made was the foundation of caste.
Abroo was the leader, or patriarch, of this group, and all its members
adhered together in time of dispute. He acted for them all, which was
the beginning of representative government. He considered more what was
to their advantage than what was to the advantage of the whole people;
and many issues turned on whether the Abrooides or the rest of the Ammi
should control. The adherents of Abroo formed a kind of aristocracy. They
were high-minded, and, by general consent, deemed better than the average
man. Abroo had a great contempt for Pounder, and in a recent quarrel
would have been killed by the latter, had not his clansmen interfered to
save him. Abroo proposed that they fight by clans, saying that he would
lead his own hosts; but the suggestion did not prevail, as most of the
Ammi were not grouped in families, and did not even know their relations.
Abroo, however, persisted in keeping his party together in war, as in
peace, and in directing their movements.

There were many other valiant men who went up in this march, and some
women. Among the latter was Watch-the-girls, who protected females
from the embraces of the stronger sex. She beat Spread-Mouth almost to
death for trying one of his smiles on a young girl in the woods, and
pulled bunches of hair out of his back. She scratched an eye out of
Goat-strut for his persistent attentions to unwilling females, and even
Pounder was afraid of her, not that she could vanquish him in fight, but
because other men generally assisted her in a fight against a lascivious
lover. She went fearlessly to war, and led many women and young girls
to battle. For, as yet, both sexes fought, and not the male only; and
Watch-the-girls had more followers than Abroo.

Such were the hosts that went up against the Lali. They numbered two
thousand, although subsequent accounts placed them at many times this
number. They were less numerous, however, than the Lali; but owing to
their greater skill and to their arms, they hoped to overcome larger
numbers.




 


[Illustration]

On the fourth day of their march the Ammi came to a body of water, which
threatened to turn them back and defeat their expedition. The great
earthquake, in tilting the country, had caused the Swamp to overflow,
and cover a great part of the dry land. There was a large lake formed in
this way, which was connected with the Swamp by a strait, or narrow neck
of water. It was necessary for the Ammi to cross this strait, or else go
round the new lake.

“This lake was not here when I passed this way before,” said Koree, “so
that it cannot be deep. Let us, therefore, go through it, for we can
easily wade.”

He thereupon marched in, leading the way for the hosts of mankind to
follow. He was soon, however, beyond his depth, and ordered a retreat.

“We have not struck the right path,” he said; “let us cross farther away
from the Swamp.”

He accordingly made a second attempt, but with no better result. The
water was everywhere too deep to ford.

“I think,” said another, “that we had better go round. If the lake is a
new one it cannot be large.”

“If the water is so deep,” replied a third, “it must extend far into the
country. I think we had better go through the Swamp.”

“There appears,” said still another, “to be more water in the Swamp than
anywhere else. I wonder where all this water comes from.”

“To settle the matter,” said Cocoanut-scooper, “I will climb this palm
tree. From its top I can see the end of the lake if it is small.”

Suiting his action to his words he bounded up the tree, which was an easy
matter for one who had climbed so many in prospecting for fruit.

“There is no end of the water,” he said, on returning. “The Swamp is
flooded and the new lake extends far out of sight.”

“There is then nothing to do,” said Koree, “but to cross it. So let us
spread out, and each hunt for a shallow place.”

“We might,” observed another, “wait till the water subsides.”

“Or,” said Oko, “we could go back and give up the war. If the country
is flooded everything beyond is destroyed, and we will make nothing by
conquering the Lali, who have no doubt been washed out with all their
provisions.”

“There is plenty of fruit beyond,” said Cocoanut-Scooper, “I observed
that before coming down from the palm. We shall have a prosperous march
if we only get over this water.”

The great flood, however, rolled, like Jordan, between them and the
promised land; and no power, human or apian, had yet crossed such a
stream.

A few limbs and trunks of trees were floating in the water, which
suggested an idea to Koree.

“If we could each get on one of these pieces of floating wood,” he said,
“we might get over the water; for the wind is driving them in that
direction.”

“Good,” said Pounder, “and I will be the first to try it. I can handle a
wild beast or an alligator, and so need not fear a log.”

So he rushed into the water and seized the trunk of a dead tree floating
near, and was soon astride it drifting toward the other shore.

Others followed his example, and soon the river was full of warriors,
each trying to mount a log and sail across the lake. Some of the limbs,
however, were too small to bear their weight, and had to be abandoned.
Others were of awkward shape and would not remain long in the same
position, and so could not be controlled. Several, however, mounted
successfully, and expected soon to reach the opposite shore. Pounder was
in the lead, and beckoned the rest to follow him.

But there were not logs enough to supply all, so that not many followed
him, and some began to disparage this means of crossing.

“Come on,” cried Pounder. “If you are afraid of the water, how do you
expect to meet the enemy?”

“Come back,” replied Koree, “till we can all provide ourselves with logs,
or else find other means of crossing.”

[Illustration: POUNDER’S MISHAP.]

“I will not come back,” he said; “you are cowards, and when I get on the
other side I will”—

Just then his log turned, and the great Pounder was seen with his feet
in the air, kicking at the sun. Down he went head first into the water
and out of sight. Soon, however, he reappeared, and after spitting out a
mouthful of water, and shaking his locks, tried to regain his log. But
he could not raise himself for awhile, and when at last he succeeded in
remounting the log it turned again and buried him a second time out of
sight.

“I would rather have hold of an alligator than of this thing,” he said,
as he came up spitting and shivering.

Finding, however, that he could not mount the log securely, he abandoned
it, and swam back to the shore; and all the rest who had not been thrown
from their logs followed his example, lest they should meet a like
disaster.

But the experiment was not lost, and the fruitless attempt to cross in
this way suggested several improvements in navigation.

“Some logs float better than others,” observed Koree; and there was a
long discussion about how to trim and hew them so as to make them hold a
man. Many experiments were made. They used their stone wedges and bear’s
teeth to hollow them into shape. This work continued for days, and as a
result of their consultations and efforts, a crude canoe, or boat was
formed, but not till after many failures to make it hold its contents.
The first success was accomplished by Duco who managed, after many
dangers, to cross the lake in a vessel of his own construction.

There was now an ambition in every one to construct a boat, and they
almost forgot the war in their enthusiasm for this new industry. The
art of ship-building was thus begun, and a navy put in process of
construction.




 


[Illustration]

“We can never at this rate,” said Koree, “construct boats enough to cross
this water. We have already toiled many days and only one man has yet
crossed and returned.”

“Even if we could get our boats ready,” replied Pounder, “we could not
rely on them to carry us safely across. Duco waited long for a good wind,
and when it came it blowed him in many directions before landing him on
the opposite shore. If we entered such vessels, we would be scattered and
lost.”

“Let us go back,” said Oko, “or we will lose all.”

Koree at this moment observed that several of the logs had floated
together, and were being driven about in a cluster. The boys were amusing
themselves by jumping from one to another, and all were being carried
along by the flood.

“If we could fasten those logs together,” he said, “they would hold many
of us, and by making several such collections we could all get across.”

This was a new idea which was immediately acted upon by the Ammi. It did
not take our early ancestors long to adopt a suggestion or introduce an
improvement. From the thought to the act was only a step, and, though
most steps were failures, they made so many that occasionally they
achieved a success.

“Collect all the logs,” he said, “and get willows and bark to fasten them
together.”

They were, therefore, soon busy collecting the logs that were in the
water, and rolling others from the land with their clubs, which they used
as levers, thus learning incidentally an important mechanical principle.
With their hatchets of flint they chopped off branches, shaped the timber
into the desired form, and even felled trees for their bark or trunks. It
was obvious that a raft would soon be constructed and set afloat.

They had shortly before built in a similar manner a small bridge near
their dwellings to enable them to cross to a dry point in the Swamp; and,
seeing a flood carry it away, (when it floated on the water), they were
not wholly unprepared to see this new raft also float.

“If one log floats why will not more?” asked Koree.

“If our bridge floated away, this also will do so,” replied another; and
they thenceforth called it the “floating bridge.”

The raft was soon finished, and a large number of men and women at once
rushed upon it, so many, indeed, that it began to sink.

This was looked upon as a failure, and the disappointment of the whole
human race was no less than when Fulton’s first steamer failed to move.

“The thing will not float,” observed Oko.

“It floated,” replied Duco, “until we all got upon it. If some would get
off it would float again.”

“But we must all cross over, or none,” replied Abroo, the Family-man.

“Let us build more rafts,” interposed Koree, “and in several of them we
can all cross.”

“Instead of this,” said Abroo, the Family-man, “let part of our hosts
cross at once, when this structure can be brought back for the others to
cross. I and my party will cross first.”

This was agreed to, except that, instead of Abroo and his clan, Duco was
chosen to take charge of the first load.

The next difficulty was in getting the raft started. It lay motionless
with its load.

“Wait till the wind rises,” said Koree.

Presently a gust struck them, but it had no effect in starting them.

“Let us push the thing with our clubs,” said Duco, at which all applied
themselves vigorously.

The raft was easily moved in this way, and continued to go as long as
they could reach bottom; but in deep water it stood still, or floated at
the mercy of the waves. Pounder tried to move it by sitting on one log
and pushing with his feet against another. Others beat the water, which
had a little effect. Duco then discovered that by pushing in the opposite
direction against the water they could make it move; and soon they were
paddling in the modern fashion. During much of the way the water was
shallow enough to permit them to use their clubs as poles, or, to get
out and push; so that they were soon far out from land and going in the
right direction.

They would now have reached the opposite shore but for Pounder, who
kept pushing in the way just described thinking he was forcing along
the raft. By reason of his vigorous efforts he snapped the bands which
held the logs together. The raft broke in pieces and he was the first to
fall through into the water. He went down between the logs which he was
pushing apart. Others fell into the water with him, but most remained
on one part or other of the raft; for it broke into nearly equal parts.
Pounder floundered awhile in the water; but, being accustomed to that,
through his previous plunges from the log, he soon got hold of one of the
rafts and lifted himself out of the water.

“These things can’t be depended on,” he said, as he regained his place on
board.

They had now two rafts instead of one, and they pushed and paddled on
each. Pounder, instead of sitting on one log and pushing against another,
next took a seat on one log and pushed with his feet against a knot
on the same log, and believed he was rendering the principal aid in
propelling the raft.

It was easier to proceed with two small rafts than one large one, and
accordingly both were soon landed on the opposite shore, but not till
several of the passengers had fallen overboard and the craft had been
badly damaged.

This was the first water voyage made by the human race. After repairing
their vessels they returned and brought over the remaining hosts, but
not without similar mishaps. Gimbo, the grandfather of Sosee, fell,
with others, into the water, and was nearly drowned. Only by standing on
tiptoes could he keep his head above water until he was rescued, when he
made the following observation:

“The water is the only place where it is better to walk on two feet than
on four.”

Having now crossed the lake it was proposed by Oko that they keep the
rafts. “We spent too much work on them,” he said, “to throw them away.”

“We cannot take them with us,” replied Koree.

“We may want them when we return,” interposed Duco; “so let us fasten
them where we can find them.”

“And let us leave somebody here to watch them,” said Oko, apprehensive
lest some of their property should be lost.

Like the ships of the Greeks on the coast of Troy these rafts were,
accordingly, made fast, so that they should be ready for the return
voyage of the warriors at the close of the war.




 


[Illustration]

The Ammi now continued their forward march with but little interruption.

“I fear this expedition will end in disaster,” said Gimbo; “our falling
into the water is a bad sign.”

“I think so to,” added Pounder, recalling his duckings; “but before it
ends I shall have a fight with the Apes, and smash some of their jaws.”

“What looks to me worst,” said another, “is, that when I was sharpening
my flint this morning, the Fire-monster suddenly appeared to me, starting
up out of the flint and immediately disappearing again.”

“I saw the same thing,” added another, “when Pounder struck me in the
eye. Fire flew in all directions and then disappeared.”

One of the scouts now returned breathless announcing that they could see
the Lali in the distance.

“Let me reconnoiter,” said Koree, who advanced rapidly to the farther
edge of the swamp, from which, indeed, the Apes could be distinctly seen.

These were running up and down the trees, apparently gathering fruit, and
chasing one another over the plains without any apparent purpose except
sport. But men never knew the deep designs of Monkeys.

“Where is Sosee, I wonder?” asked Koree, who was too much interested
in the object of his love to attend closely to the requirements of
war. He did not observe that at that moment a great ape was stealthily
approaching him from one side.

For the Apes had out their pickets as well as the men, owing to
apprehensions of an attack; while others were scattered through the Swamp
hunting food.

After a little waiting and looking he thought he descried Sosee in the
distance walking with a handsome ape who was exceedingly attentive to her.

Jealousy now succeeded to prudence, and his rage would have at once
carried him alone into the ranks of the enemy to capture her (and be
captured instead), but, another incident prevented him from accomplishing
this disaster.

“I will have her at once,” he said, “and scatter the brains of that
monkey attendant over any one who opposes me.”

At this instant the ape who was watching him ran up and dealt him a
powerful blow, knocking his resolution, his jealousy and his love out of
him for a while.

Koree, recovering his senses, now transferred his rage to this new
quarter, and, following it up with blows, soon brought to the ground his
assailant.

This was witnessed by other scouts of the Lali who ran to the rescue of
their companion, and also by some scouts of the Ammi who closed on the
combatants, so that an immediate fight was threatened between the pickets
of the two forces.

[Illustration: THE BATTLE BEGINS.]

This encounter, all unpremeditated, nearly defeated the schemes of both
parties. It destroyed the hope of secrecy on the part of the Ammi, who
thought to take the Lali by surprise; and destroyed the hope of ambush
on the part of the Lali who meant to entrap the approaching enemy in the
Swamp. Each party, moreover, being ignorant of the force by which it was
attacked, and fearing that it might be larger than its own, shrank from
fight.

As soon, therefore, as they got released from each other, they flew
apart, as if they had been fighting to escape, and not to conquer. Both
being afraid, and not daring to seem so, they affected to despise each
other, and so, showing their teeth and grinning a defiance, they went in
opposite directions, each hoping the other would take the encounter for
a chance meeting of strange apes hunting for food, and not a skirmish
between the advance guards of mighty hosts prepared for battle.

It was too late, however. Both powers were now apprised of each others’
designs, and both immediately put themselves in readiness for action.

Koree was much blamed by the Ammi for his rashness in precipitating this
encounter.

“It was your love,” said Abroo, “which brought us here to fight, and it
is your love which will now defeat us. O that love would take sense along
with it when it goes either to woo a woman or fight a battle.”

“But it generally turns to foolishness before it accomplishes anything,”
added Cocoanut-Scooper.

“And were there not a fool also on the other side it would never succeed
at all,” said Oko.

“Koree’s case,” added a fourth, “makes more trouble for others than
pleasure for himself.”

“For his falling in love once,” said Pounder, “I fell in the water twice.”

And so they went on reproaching poor Koree for having such a strong love
that it would not let them rest, and such a foolish one that it would not
let them fight.

Koree had nothing to say, but being himself most convinced of his own
foolishness, was angry that others agreed with him, and so simply changed
the subject.

“Be ready to fight at once,” he said, “as we may be attacked before we
have time to decide whether we will fight or not. Between the lake and
the Apes we have nothing left but to triumph.”

“It is either to be killed by the Apes or drowned in the water,” said
Oko, “and I don’t like either.”

“We’ll kill some apes before we are killed ourselves,” answered Pounder;
“at least, I will.”

“Their forces are more numerous than ours,” insisted Oko.

“That being so,” said Koree, who turned every objection into a new
device, “we will fight them by stealth, creeping upon them by night, or
enticing them into the woods.”

“Let us rather,” said Duco, “attack them openly, and all at once; though
we are less numerous we are armed, and have more skill than they.”

“I think,” said Gimbo, “that the Apes will triumph; they walk on all
fours, and people can fight better with four feet than with two; besides,
it is not right to—”

“Be still,” said Koree, “or give us your help, instead of your fears.”

It was resolved at last, as they could neither retreat nor stand still,
to go forward; and they determined to await an opportunity to make an
assault.

And now dread Terror brooded over the hosts of men, causing hearts to
flutter and visions of death to rush on the soul. Night and Blood and
Pain visited many in dreams, while to some Glory appeared, walking over a
vanquished foe. As Koree slept he thought he saw Sosee coming to him in
beauty with a branch of evergreen oak, and promise that he should rule
over a new race, while she should sit by his side as queen to receive the
admiration of all men.

The Apes also quaked, and the convulsions which had just thrown up the
Alps were trifling compared with the tremors that shook the breasts of
the embattled hosts that night. The morrow was to witness a conflict that
would decide whether the human race was to remain on earth or go out of
history in its infancy.




 


[Illustration]

Aurora now appeared in the east starting the sleepers from their dreams,
and advanced so bright that the terrified Ammi thought the Fire-monster
had seized the sky, and was spreading his wings over the whole world,
portending death to mortals. First she tinted the new-born Alps with
gold, then chased the mists from the valleys, and at last spread the
whole earth with day. The courage of the hosts now returned, which had
left them during the reign of the night-monsters in their dreams.

With the coming of the light the Ammi marched boldly up to the Lali,
while the latter, thrown first into confusion, ran about in a panic, and
then, gathering themselves into a body, offered defiance to the intruders.

As when a storm, rushing from the north, suddenly strikes the sea,
rolling the waves in mountain ridges along the main, which again,
breaking, rush back and fall like cliffs into the deep, stirring the
great cauldron of waters to its bottom, and then spread out again into
a calm, so the Apes, mightily stirred at the approach of stern War, and
driven by their fears, rushed hither and thither over the plain, mounting
the trees and scattering to places of safety, and then, as the storm of
terror passed on its way regained composure and settled down on the field
of battle ready for action.

First advanced from the ranks of the Ammi the mighty Pounder, impatient
for battle, and, surveying the plain which lay between the Men and the
Apes, he grinned a challenge to the whole Lali.

Him seeing from afar the mighty Scratch-for-Fleas, starting up from the
hosts of the Lali and shaking himself, (at which the earth trembled as
when Jupiter shook Olympus with a nod), advanced to him, saying:

“For what purpose come you to the shores of the Lali? Have the cocoanuts
failed beyond the Swamp, or do you come for our women? We will defend
our own, be they cocoanuts or girls. Go back, or taste the wrath of the
Monkeys.”

Him answering with a grin, the fierce Pounder showed his teeth. His great
lips parted, like the swinging gates of Babylon, bringing to view huge
rows of marble-like columns that lined, like palisades, a deep, dark
gorge.

A like mouth opened on the other side; and Scratch-for-Fleas, looking now
to the east and now to the west, advanced, first on four feet and then
on two. Next he moved sidewise, and, at last, for a moment, stood still,
moving however in contemplation his great features, which, following
his thoughts, changed fast in shape and color like clouds in a mountain
storm.

“Do you come for the maiden of Ilo?” he said. “You will return without
her. Give back your stolen fruits and women, and we may make peace before
war begins.”

Pounder thereupon, without answering, rushed for Scratch-for-Fleas, being
better fitted for war than for diplomacy.

Scratch-for-Fleas, fearing the mighty assault, retreated to the hosts of
the Lali, unwilling to fight so great a champion; and thereupon a loud
shout went up from the Ammi at their bloodless victory. Pounder, however,
was disappointed, for he loved fighting better than conquering.

Then the nimble-shanked Nut-picker, he who had been reared on the slopes
of Wildcat Mountain, went out from the hosts of the Lali bearing a
cocoanut in his hand.

Him seeing, the avaricious Oko, not knowing whether it was a weapon or a
truce-signal, went forth to meet, saying, “Do you mean war or cocoanuts?
If you mean cocoanuts, produce enough and we may give up the fight.”

Then the nimble-shanked Nut-picker, true-aiming, threw and struck him,
and the cocoanut rolled to the ground on one side, and Oko on the other.
Picking up himself and then the cocoanut, Oko thereupon retired to the
ranks of the Ammi bearing with him his defeat and his booty.

War was now declared and begun, and the two parties, hitherto friends, or
indifferent to each other, became enemies. So great a difference does so
slight a change produce.

Then, according to the legends of the Ammi, the great spirit of Shoozoo,
looking out from the heavens at the combatants, and fearing that his
worshippers might be destroyed, called a council of the gods. Simlee,
his wife, Queen of Heaven, appeared, leaving her mists, and the great
winged Alligator came up out of the Swamp, dripping with the flood, and
the Fire-god left his place in the sky, and the Rainbow folded up his
rays, and the Wind left the earth and sea, (so that there was a season of
calms), and they all met in the sky to take counsel on the events that
were about to transpire on earth.

“Dire war,” said Shoozoo, “is hovering over the world, and, unless it is
averted, neither Men nor Apes nor earth will long survive. Only recently
I saw the world mount up toward the sky, and to-day it stands on tip-toe
trying to reach the heavens; for the Alps have not yet gone down. The
great Swamp left its bed to march over dry ground, and has not yet gone
back. The noise of the earthquake has hardly yet subsided, but still
reverberates in distant thunders; and, should war yet rage, things will
be so mixed up that nothing will remain for earth or sky that is certain
for either.”

“I will arise as a mist,” said Simlee, “and, passing between the two
armies, prevent their collision by destroying their sight.”

“The Fire-god will soon scatter the mists,” said Night, “so that they can
fight in clear day. Let me rather settle down upon them, through whom
none can see; and, though it be but noon, I will wipe out their day.”

And wrapping herself in thick clouds she started for the earth to cover
the battle-field with impenetrable shadows.

“Let me rather,” said the great Alligator, “empty the Swamp on them
again, and overwhelm them with a second flood.”

“They have made boats,” said the Wind, “and now defy the waters. Let me
rather start the air against them. I will give it wings to beat their
faces and call in Thunder to frighten them and Rain to blind them, and
will so mix heaven and earth and sea together against them that they
cannot proceed.”

“There is nothing,” said Shoozoo, “that will avail, but to assuage
their wrath, which crosses streams and night and outlasts weather. An
interruption to-day prolongs the war, but does not end it. Let us not,
by impeding them, add to their rage against each other and their anger
against us. For I fear that men will one day mount to heaven and destroy
the Gods.”

This advice they consented to follow, not, however, because any of them
wanted to, but because they could not agree among themselves what to do.

It was accordingly decided that the deities, operating all together,
should descend to the combatants to work on their minds; and so, wrapping
themselves in clouds, and mists, and rain, and shadow, and light, which
were all mistaken by Mortals for forms of the weather, they entered the
battle with both Men and Apes, and worked for peace and a mitigation of
the horrors of war.

But when Men and Gods are thus at variance, the Gods fail; and the
council of heaven having broken up, the war of earth went on.




 


[Illustration]

First Koree, unmindful of the counsel of the skies, moved forward, and,
fearing neither Gods nor Monkeys, sought to begin the battle.

He stood in the plain between the two armies, like an oak in an open
field between two forests. Breathing defiance to the Lali, he called out:

“Who dares to meet me of all your hosts, and ward off death from his brow
when I discharge this dart, the swift avenger of my wrong?”

Him seeing, and not fearing, the great Tree-climber of the mountains ran
to meet, he who had often pulled the tails of cats, and grinned at larger
beasts. Stopping often, and then starting again, like a great river that
now rushes with violence, and then stops and whirls in an eddy, (showing
commotion in its stop as in its onward course), he, seeming irresolute,
plunged at last at Koree, having eluded his missiles, and seized him with
hands and teeth. Hair and blood flew from Koree, who in turn sent a blow
to Tree-climber’s ribs, which loosed his ribs and no less his fingers
and teeth from Koree’s flesh; and the great warriors, bleeding and
aching, flew apart. They stood, frowning like two mountain peaks about
to fall with a crash upon each other, but were stayed in their rage by a
return of Fear, the destroyer of battles. Both having enough, and being
uncertain what it would be to get more, went back, one to the west like
the sun, and the other to the east like a shadow; and there was a lull in
the storm.

[Illustration: KOREE’S CHALLENGE.]

Then Kimpoo, the skunk-scented, rising among the Lali, went forth,
breathing war from his extended nostrils, and, scratching first his thigh
and then his ribs, said in defiant tones:

“Invaders of our homes! go back to disgrace, or come forth to death.”

So saying he threw a cocoanut which grazed the ear of Duco, calling forth
a little blood and a big howl, and then passed on and struck the stomach
of Pounder, producing only a grunt.

Then High-tail, the Wood-pecker hunter, ran forth, he who knew all the
holes in Possum Grove, and smelt at many and was sad. Aiming at Kimpoo
a marrow bone, he threw it with such force, that, whistling through the
air, it was heard but not seen. It entered his head where a flea had left
a bite at early dawn; and as the bone went in his soul went out. Down he
fell with a crash, as when a mountain fir is broken in the storm.

Then Ilko, a friend of the slain ape and lover of huckle berries, rushed
forth to avenge his death, and, aiming a stone at the head of High-tail,
threw it with such precision that death entered where he struck, and the
losses between the two forces were equal.

Then seeing that Death was to be the companion of this War, and uncertain
which army would survive, Koree invoked the aid of Shoozoo.

“Great spirit of the skies and Swamp, God and Alligator,” he said, “teach
us to conquer on this field or to run away in time. May our arms be
stronger than the enemy, or our feet swifter than Death.”

And then rushing out he called on any of the Lali to come forth to meet
him in battle, and particularly Ilo, the robber of his pleasures.

But Ilo was sitting afar off with Sosee, guarding her against escape
and the seductions of Oboo his rival, and he heard not the challenge to
battle.

But Owl-catcher heard, and, fired with anger and a desire for glory, went
forth to meet him. On all fours he went, looking up at times as he ran
and rising on his feet to survey the field.

Koree, advancing, threw a sharpened flint at him, aiming at where the
hair is parted on the brow, and there it entered. The distant Alps
disappeared from the eyes of Owl-catcher, and, as all things faded from
his sight, he knew not whether the world or a monkey was collapsing.

Now Ilo, hearing that he was challenged, came to the fight; but not
willingly. Sosee had demanded that he play not the coward; for love
cannot follow the timorous. But whether she deeply designed that he
should die or be victor, none could fathom. He came to the front and met
the proud Koree who said:

“I have a plentiful supply of death for the Lali, and for you I will send
it on this bone;” and he discharged a split marrow-bone at his breast.
It was one that Sosee had sharpened while they talked together of love
and acted out their conversation, and she had graved on it, with a bear’s
tooth, the wing of a dragon fly.

This marrow-bone pierced the flesh of Ilo, but not his love-tickled
heart; and he ran away screaming and bleeding, not wishing to die while
in the joys of his first love.

He sought out Sosee in the distance, who showered her compassion, if not
her affection, upon him; and she drew the bone from his breast, when,
seeing it was the weapon of Koree which her own hands had fashioned, she
was thrown into consternation.

“Is my lover fighting my lover?” she asked, “and do I make the weapons
that slay them?” and she rushed to the scene of battle and came between
the lines.

At the sight of Sosee a shout arose from the Ammi, who thought that
she had escaped, or else that the Lali, fearing their defeat, were
surrendering her. Koree ran to meet her, forgetful that the battle was
raging, when, being about to grasp her in his arms, he was struck by a
cocoanut in the ear, which had been thrown by Tree-jumper, an ape from
the Bamboo plains, who had started in her pursuit. Koree fell to the
ground, stunned by the stroke of the ape and the sight of his beloved,
for the double blow on his eye and ear exhausted him, being already weary
from strife. But he fell unhurt, and was picked up by friends and carried
to a place of safety.

Sosee, however, was seized by Tree-jumper, and taken back to the Lali,
who placed her far from the front, where she was safe from both death and
rescue.




 


[Illustration]

Now the battle raged on all sides. Not one but many went forth from each
army, and were engaged in groups fighting hand to hand, or throwing
missiles. The sudden appearance of Sosee, which revived the hopes of the
Ammi, who thought the girl and the end of the war were both within their
grasp, increased their fury when they saw her followed by a captor, and a
general rush was made to take the field and the girl by storm.

First Pounder entered the combat, and was met by an ape from the north
country. This ape was descended from a long line of heroes; Sookaloo was
his father, who had fought bumble-bees in the meadows about the great
springs, and there the bones of his kindred repose. This ape, advancing
to meet Pounder, drew the battle toward him. Both clenched and opened
their jaws, and soon both were in each other’s arms and teeth. Anger and
strength met in Pounder, and were united for the death of his antagonist.
But this was delayed awhile, and struggles, growls and blood were
yielded instead. Then weakness followed, and at last darkness gathered
about the eyes of the ape; his thoughts took flight, and quiet settled
over him even in battle.

Striding over his body Pounder now rushed on to new conquests, impatient
for more strife. A great gorilla-like monster next met him, approaching
from afar. With thoughts of death in his eye, he came walking on his
hands, swinging his great body between them, like a huge kettle between
two posts. He appeared to be walking and sitting at once.

“Come you to bring new honor to these arms?” said Pounder. “I will soon
bear your death about me as a trophy, and those that I send out of the
world will not be lonely beyond the Swamp.”

As when Day and Night meet at dawn, and, in hot contest redden the whole
sky with blood, and, Night being slain, Day moves on over the sky in
undisputed and undivided sway, so these mighty heroes met, and in the
battle the ape was overcome and sank from the contest, while Pounder,
rising like the sun from the death of Night, marched on victorious over
the scene, and was lord of the field.

On again rushed Pounder, like Hector at Troy; and the Apes, seeing their
warriors fall at his strokes, feared to engage him in single combat.

“Let us attack him together,” they said; and two great apes stood up to
meet him, like twin mountain peaks approached by a storm. One met his
fist with his eye and saw no more that day; the other seized his arm and
in that grasp laid hold of Death, whom none survive; and as he fell the
dull earth reëchoed the crash to the mountains, which he alone did not
hear.

Terror now took hold of all that beheld the mighty Pounder, and they fled
from his advance as peasants working in a field flee from an approaching
flood, some to be overtaken and destroyed, and others to escape to a safe
place in the highlands. Pounder now chased, instead of fought, the Apes,
hunting for a foe with whom to measure his strength and with difficulty
finding one.

At last Ilo, recovering from his wound, but not his rage, rushed again to
the field, (impelled also by Sosee), and, seeing the advance of Pounder,
which drove the Apes before him, met him with a stone, (which reaches
further than an ape’s arm). Forth into the air, like Iris from the
command of Jove, rushed this messenger of wrath, and, singing a battle
cry as it went, it struck Pounder in the breast; when out went his breath
and up went his feet—but only for awhile. Pounder arose again, but, being
unable to fight, was carried back by his comrades; and again the fight
went on without him, to his great disappointment.

The Apes, encouraged by the arrest of the flood of death, now returned to
the field, and everywhere were single fights. Stones, cocoanuts, gourds
and bones flew through the air. Cries and groans mingled with growls, and
which was man and which was monkey could not be discerned in the battle.

Finger-at-his-nose, an ape from the shores lying to the south, where his
ancestors fished for crabs with their tails, and made mighty grimaces
while waiting for a bite, scraped the face of Stretch-mouth with a shell,
and was put to flight with a club in hands of Abroo; and, as he ran a
shower of stones followed him, and he thought the crabs of all the Swamp
were pulling at him.

Then High-climber, who was quick to look around and unfriendly to
mosquitos, advanced from among the Apes with a cocoanut in his hand. This
cocoanut he had pulled in a dense grove at sunset and hid at the foot of
a palm, where a buzzard was feeding on an aurochs. The buzzard dug it
up and carried it to a mountain crag, where Imko, finding it, brought
it to the camp of the Lali. There High-climber, seeing it, again took
possession of it and slew Imko the supposed thief. With this cocoanut,
High-climber, aiming at the head of Frog-catcher, struck him where the
nose separates the eyes, like the mountains of Caucasus between two great
seas. Frog-catcher fell and one less Ammi was left to propagate the new
race.

Then Watch-the-Girls, furious with rage, rushed forth, and, with a sharp
stone and loud shout, mixed in the fight. Ape after ape fell before her,
wounded or scared. Like a she-wolf tearing the fold she ran about dealing
destruction, while the timid flock fled on all sides, or gathered in
groups too frightened to flee. One, Bushy-face thought to resist her,
and, turning, aimed a dart at her bright eye. But, too dazzled or too
terrified to aim, he missed his mark, when, from the same eye, she sent
a dart of defiance and from her hand a stone. Both struck the eye which
aimed the first blow, and back went retribution on the wrong intended.
Down sank Bushy-face in darkness, and away went all things from his view.
To the world the monkey was no more, and to the monkey the world was no
more; and which was destroyed has never been settled between them.

Then off in the distance was heard a great chorus of screams, while a
rush of all the Apes to that quarter drew the battle with it. The girls,
who had been led to the war by Watch-the-Girls, then thought to enter the
fight. They had been restrained by their leader; but now, impetuous, they
rushed against the enemy; whom seeing, the salacious Apes, enamoured of
the daughters of Men, and forgetting their anger in their lust, gave up
the battle for a rape, and rushed upon the girls to make them prisoners.
The girls, scorning to be carried away instead of attacked, (having come
to fight and not to be wooed), struggled hard with their captors, but
more from pride than desire.

Then all the Ammi, seeing that their girls were about to be taken,
transferred the war to that quarter, and fought for their own, instead
of against the enemy. Inspired by jealousy as well as rage, the battle
now waxed fiercer, as when to a raging fire is added the wind, and the
conflagration spreads into a forest. Death moved about rapidly over the
field, visiting now a man and now an ape, and calling him to the Walhalla
beyond the Swamp; and the plain was scattered with his victims.




 


[Illustration]

Oboo, hearing there was a fight for girls, now came forward to take part.
He had till now sulked in the rear, because of Ilo’s good fortune in
possessing Sosee. Defeated in love, and still smarting from his wounds,
he had refused, like Achilles, to fight, and, nursing his wrath afar off,
desired the defeat of the Lali. He had long insisted that Sosee should be
restored to the Ammi, and the war ended. But, as others continued it, he
persisted in his absence, even when the Lali were in danger of rout and
their possessions of loss. Many had fallen on account of his inaction.
Oft did the chiefs approach him to assuage his wrath. But the volcanic
fires in his breast refused to be cooled, and awaited their time to burst
out and destroy his rivals. An ape will not waste himself on an enemy
when he has a rival for his anger.

But hearing that there was to be a capture of girls, his anger melted
into lust, and he relented. What neither the North Wind nor the Rain
could do the warmth within him sufficed to accomplish—it moved his
mighty will. For dread War, stalking over the land and breathing his hot
breath in his face, had failed to arouse him. Mightier Reason, borne on
the tongue of Pity, could not move him. Even Glory had no allurements to
draw him from his retreat. But Beauty, which now visited him in fancies,
tickled him into action; and, like the needle following the invisible
pole, he went, strongly impelled, to the scene of battle, where to his
thoughts a field was pictured with delights.

Rumor went abroad, and everywhere proclaimed to the female Apes that the
great Oboo was coming to battle, and many hearts beat at the prospect of
beholding him. Young women and maidens came to see, nor did the old stay
away. Many who had an interest in him past, present or future, sought to
look on; and those who could not be moved by love came from curiosity.

With majestic step their hero advanced. Not as the common warrior comes
came he forth. Slowly like the Morning, he advanced to the eyes of a
wondering world. A female ape had parted his locks in the morning and
picked the burrs from his shaggy limbs; and, as he stood out against the
sky, his form was a monument of beauty to both the women and himself.

Looking to one side and then to the other, (not to reconnoitre, but to
receive the admiration of the females) he reflected, as he shook his
slender legs, that they who now beheld him with solicitude would receive
him back with gratitude. Victory seemed assured in his bearing, and, like
the sun at noon, he dazzled the hosts with his splendor.

Such was the appearance of the mighty Oboo on entering the field; and as
he advanced the eastern zephyrs moved through his louse-less locks, and
his brow, like the forest-crowned head of Mt. Ida, seemed glorified.

Him seeing from afar the great Boomboo, calling all the Gods to his aid,
ran forth to meet. “O Shoozoo,” he cried, “lend me all the heavens with
their fires and loud thunders to match this terror of the plains, the
wrath-inflamed fighter of men and lover of women; and to-night I will
devote to you a live dragon fly caught where the thistles of the Swamp do
bloom and the bats are sleeping.”

So saying he seized a big water-melon, such as two men of our day could
not lift, and he raised it in mid air. It was a melon which had grown on
the sandy banks of Alligator Swamp; three generations had eaten fruit
from that spot, and cast the seeds along the wide-reaching shore. This
great water-melon the mighty Boomboo smashed on the head of Oboo. For,
throwing it with great force, he sent it heavily through the air, as when
a huge rock is thrown convulsively from a volcano. A great flying terror
it went, casting a moving shadow over the earth; and it went not in vain;
but, descending from its flight, it struck the well-picked head of Oboo,
and dreadful was the sound of the thud.

Bursting with a quake, as when the earth opens, it was scattered in
countless pieces, never to be again united. Pulp and rind and seeds were
splattered over his brow and well-smoothed locks, and the juice ran down
over his face, and covered his hairy chest, and flowed from his limbs
to the ground. Dripping and sticky the proud Oboo, like a half-drowned
rat crawling out of a well, sneaked away, unfit to be seen, and would no
longer match his prowess against the Ammi in battle.

[Illustration: THE RETREAT OF THE LALI.]

Inextinguishable laughter arose among the men; while even among
the Lali there was merriment. The females were most amused at the
seed-besplattered lover; and Ilo, glad in his heart at his inglorious
retreat, said with contempt:

“Go back to the women and get dried up; you were made not for war, but
for love.”

Like a bubble blown by a boy, which swells bigger and bigger, until the
sky and mountains are reflected in it, and then, at the moment of its
greatest bulk, when it seems to carry the whole world, bursts and settles
into a little suds, so the swelling Oboo, who matched the sun in its
splendor when he came to battle, dwindled to a sop as he returned.

Meanwhile the girls who had been drawn into the battle, and for whom Oboo
had left his retreat, fought so fiercely that none of them were captured,
but many of their assailants were slain or left wounded on the field.

And now all the Lali retreated from the victorious Ammi, being
demoralized by the victory of the girls and the discomfiture of Oboo,
while the Ammi prepared to move with all their force on the Lali and to
end the war that day.

But Night settled down on the contending armies, and the wheels of
history stopped awhile.




 


[Illustration]

Sleep came not to the Ammi that night, but instead Pestilence settled
down upon them. The water of the Swamp, stirred by the recent floods,
and the strange fruits which they had eaten since leaving home, had
brought Colic to the camp, and, like Dreams, it visited the couches of
the heroes, and rolled them about in aches and pains. Night slackened its
pace and dwelt long among them, covering with darkness their pain; and,
as they ran about holding their stomachs and looking for sweet relief,
which came not, the Lali, who faintly discerned their movements in the
moonlight, thought they were making preparations for battle, and so they
fled, lest disaster should follow on their defeat of the day before. Thus
did the Lali run away from the Belly-ache.

And when Aurora, closing the gates of the world on Night, advanced,
announcing with freshened breath the Day, and her golden train fell in
rich drapery over the eastern sky, the Ammi were seen lying about in
groups, doubled up and griping, each caring not for glorious victory but
for peace within. Koree forgot his beloved Sosee, and Pounder lay in a
big heap, caring neither for battle nor country.

Gimbo walking about on all fours administered relief, being physician as
well as priest.

“There is nothing so good for colic,” he said, “as to pound the stomach;”
and, taking a long-necked pumpkin, he gave each a blow on the spot where
the pain was felt. This caused the patient to give a jerk and a howl.

“That is good;” said Gimbo, “it is the colic jumping out of you;” and in
very bad cases he repeated the blow.

“It is well,” he added, “to keep your stomachs turned toward the Swamp;
the colic always goes out on that side, owing to the influence of the
Alligator.”

He also applied the wing of a dragon fly to those who had not yet
contracted the complaint, with a view to keep it away.

“When the colic sees this sign of Shoozoo,” he said, “it is afraid to
come near you.”

There were no hostilities that day, the Lali being kept back by fear and
the Ammi by colic.

On the morning following, when Pain and Fear had fled from both camps,
the combatants were far apart. The Lali had retreated either for safety
or preparations, and the Ammi had the field, but were without an enemy
either to fight or treat with for peace.

Anxiety now took the place of colic in their breasts, and uncertainty
about what the Lali were devising made them hesitate about their own
course.

Meanwhile other matters came to occupy their attention.

“I have long noticed,” said Gimbo, “that it is getting colder. Walking
on four feet I learn things sooner than others. I used to walk without
discomfort to my hands. But now the ground is so cold that I can hardly
stand it with either feet or hands. I must get up a tree to keep warm, or
else go into a hole.”

Others had observed the same change. In fact it was the sudden cold,
coming the night before, that helped bring on the colic just mentioned.
It disturbed the temperature of the body, and the first inconvenience
from sudden changes of climate was felt by mankind.

Nor was this a small matter. The first Glacial Period had set in. That
great catastrophe which, at the end of the Tertiary Age, covered the
northern hemisphere with mountains of ice, burying the earth out of
sight, and destroying all life, was beginning to make itself felt.

Farther to the north, (as they heard), the progress of the cold was well
under way, but now its influence first reached the Ammi.

“What is that?” asked several at once, directing their attention to the
sky.

A snow storm had come. It was the first snow that had fallen in those
regions, and was a stranger to both Men and Apes.

“It’s the clouds coming down from the sky,” said one; “they have broken
in pieces and are falling.”

“It is blossoms from the trees in heaven,” said Koree, who had grown
sentimental from long thinking about Sosee; “Shoozoo is shaking them
down as he runs through the forests after owls.”

“I think it is dragon flies,” said Gimbo, who observed the form of the
flakes. “There is here the short-beam and the long-beam. Surely Shoozoo
is coming to the earth, and we ought to be very devout.”

Among the Lali the snow produced still greater consternation. Some said
it was the white form of Simlee, the wife of Shoozoo, who was coming to
the Apes; and all agreed that it came on account of the war between the
Apes and the Men. In as much as a snow-flake, when examined, was seen to
turn to water, a priest of the Lali remarked that it was going back to
Shoozoo, the great reservoir, or Swamp, into which all things at last
return.

Suddenly there was a tremendous rush of arctic animals over both camps,
and all the country, as far as the eye could reach, was alive with them.
They came from the north where the heavy snows had started a migration
southward. Aurochs, reindeer, Irish elk and other kinds now extinct,
were in the herds. They rushed pell-mell before the snows, tramping down
everything in their way, and falling over one another, like a stampede of
buffaloes or wild horses. Many were trampled to death or else left maimed
in their trail. Mingled among them were lions, leopards and other savage
beasts, which followed them for food, or were also migrating to a warmer
climate; so that there was a slaughter of many kinds in the herds. It
seemed to the Ammi as if all the beasts had gone to war, as well as the
Men and Apes, and were marching in great armies and fighting constant
battles.

“The Sky and the North are both pouring out their forces upon us,” said
Abroo.

“Let us catch them, and keep them for food,” said Oko, who had been
trying to tame a calf of the Urus which he had captured, thus beginning
the work of domestication, which the descendants of the Ammi have
continued till now.

“It is better to let them go,” said Koree, who picked up the clubs and
missiles which they had scattered; “we ought to be glad to be rid of
them.”

For some of the Ammi had been trampled to death in the stampede, so that
this incursion of cattle upon them was nearly as destructive as the war.

After the herds had gone by, they were seen to spread out over the plains
in the direction from which the Ammi had come to the seat of war. There
they found grass and were leisurely grazing.

“It looks,” said Abroo, “as if they had come to stay, so that when we
return from the war they will dispute the possession of Cocoanut Hill
with us.”

The snow, however, continued to fall, which, like the curse of the
wandering Jew, was to give the fugitives no rest.




 


[Illustration]

Meanwhile the Lali who had been worsted in the war, and whose defeat even
the gallant Oboo could not avert, determined on a change of tactics.
Recognizing their inferiority as combatants (being not so generally armed
or so skilled in the use of arms as the Ammi), they resolved to make up
in numbers what they lacked in skill; and so they sent out ambassadors
and summoned all the apes from the countries beyond, shrewdly using the
respite of the last few days from battle to collect allies.

Out into the forests and among the palm groves, therefore, they went,
calling to the inhabitants of the trees and vines to come down, and
sending their summons into the tangled thickets of the swamps. And the
apes left their cocoanuts and cinnamon branches, and came up out of their
fisheries, (abandoning their sports with parrots, and their fights with
owls,) and hurried to the country of the Lali and the seat of war.

The Apes were far more numerous than the men, the latter being only
one colony in the whole world, who were now all collected on one field
of battle, whereas the Apes, though differing from one another, (being
of many species besides the Man-apes,) were practically without limit
(taking in all the country and all the varieties of Apes,) so that it was
only a question of how wide a territory they should scour for allies, in
order to bring any number to battle.

These apes, moreover, could be easily united on almost any project, as
there were yet no conflicting interests to dissuade them; so that in a
short time an innumerable host was assembled at the seat of war—great,
small, tailless, speechless and everything from the big gorilla to the
common monkey.

To add to the good fortune of the Lali, there had come also, along with
the migrating cattle, several large herds of apes from the north. These,
which at another time would have met the hostility of the Lali, and
perhaps been slain as enemies, or as competitors for their food, were now
welcomed and enlisted as allies against the Ammi.

But the Apes, though countless, were not so closely confederated as the
Men. They did not live together in large numbers, and the few groups that
did exist were not accustomed to act long together. In fact the Apes
hardly knew one another, so that they were unconscious alike of their
power and their weakness.

The forces of the two armies were, therefore, woefully unequal. On one
side was a host as countless as the Myrmidons, composed, indeed, of
motley groups, which might prove unmanageable in war, but which had to
fight in order to cohere at all, and to fight soon. On the other side was
a small, but skilled and disciplined body, more homogeneous and capable
of keeping to a fixed purpose. It was obvious, therefore, that if the
Apes should make a sudden attack they would overwhelm and extirpate the
Ammi; for then, all the hosts would take part, and, being impulsive,
would fight vigorously before having time to fall to pieces as a body.

It became as important, therefore, for the Ammi to now have a delay of
hostilities as it was before for the Lali. This fact, however, was not
known to the Ammi themselves, who, on account of the distance between the
two forces, were not aware of the reinforcements of the Lali.

“Let us proceed at once against the enemy,” said Koree, innocently
inviting his own destruction. “They have retreated so far that it may
take some time to find them.”

“That’s right,” said Pounder, “we should begin early so that Night may
not again overtake us before victory.”

“Come then,” said Koree, “this day will decide——”

Here there was a great surprise. As they were about to march to battle,
and to their own destruction, Sosee burst in upon them, followed by a
strange ape, both nearly breathless from running.

Koree uttered a shout of joy, and ran to meet her. Others seeing her
pursued, seized the ape that followed her, and were about to slay him
when Sosee caused them to desist.

“He is a friend, and has helped me to come hither,” she said.

And then, without regarding the expressions of joy on the part of Koree
and others over her return, she called out loudly:

“Retreat! Hide in the woods!—and be quick!”

This was startling to the Ammi, who believed they were on the eve of
complete victory.

She informed them of the countless hosts that had joined the Lali, who
expected to move immediately on the Ammi and destroy them entirely.

“If you can retreat long enough to delay the battle,” she said, “you may
be saved. I heard the counsels of the Lali chiefs, and they agree that
if they do not fight at once their forces can not be held together, but,
being composed of different tribes of Apes, unused to discipline, will
break up in confusion.”

Sosee then told of her escape, which was undertaken as the only means of
saving the Ammi, and accomplished at the risk of her own life.

She had been guarded, she said, by Ilo, Oboo and another, and so
could not escape but by the greatest cunning and good fortune. Ilo,
however, being engaged this day in the council of war, could not watch
her closely, while Oboo, having become interested in some female apes
belonging to the new comers, had wandered off after them, so that she was
left practically alone. Being thus at liberty she persuaded the remaining
guard,—a simple ape who did not understand his business,—to accompany
her in a race, when she adroitly led him to the camp of the Ammi, and so
escaped.

[Illustration: SOSEE WARNS THE AMMI.]

On hearing her story, Koree, overjoyed at his good fortune and Sosee’s,
said:

“There is reason in what she says. Let us retreat.”

For Koree, having now received back Sosee, did not care what became of
the war, but was ready for peace at any price.

Pounder, however, objected.

“I’m not afraid of all the Apes between here and sunrise,” he said, “and
I am for fighting them. I’ll kill the big ones with the little ones.”

Others, however, more prudent, agreed with Koree, and it was decided to
follow the advice of Sosee.

So the whole force of the Ammi prepared to move back into the Swamp.

“Let us take everything with us,” said Oko. “We may need it when we get
away.”

“Delay for nothing,” said Sosee, “or you will not get yourselves away.”

Soon, therefore, they started on their retreat; when Sosee remarked:

“I must now go back to the Lali.”




 


[Illustration]

These words of Sosee, “I must now go back to the Lali,” caused more
surprise to the Ammi than her sudden appearance among them had done.

“There is something unfathomable in that girl,” said Pounder. “We
undertook this war for her, and now, when we have obtained her, she wants
to go back to the enemy. I fear she has been won over to the Apes by
flattery, or a new lover, and comes back as a spy. Don’t let her return.”

“I wonder,” observed Koree to himself, “if she really has a new lover.”

“If I do not go back,” she said, “all I have told you will be in vain. If
the Lali, who do not yet know that I am here, should learn of my escape,
they will attack you at once, suspecting that I have communicated their
designs to you; and then all will be lost.”

“If you go,” replied Koree, “all will be lost at any rate—to me.”

And Koree insisted that see should not return.

“I do not believe her story,” said Pounder, “and I insist that we keep
our ground and also keep her. Otherwise she may carry back information to
the enemy.”

“I think too,” said Koree, “that we should not give up what we came for.
If we go back without her our escape will not be worth the making.”

Others thought it best to let her return, so that a dispute arose and
finally a quarrel. Koree, however, prevailed; and so, against her will,
she was compelled to fall in line and enter the Swamp with the rest.

But though Koree gained her possession he did not gain her consent. She
refused to be reconciled to him, and insisted during the retreat that she
be allowed to return.

“I know,” said Koree to himself, “that she has another lover. But she
will soon forget him, and I will keep her now that I have her. She will
be more easily won back to me in my presence than in my absence.”

But Sosee, thus forced to remain, proved an enemy to him rather than a
lover.

“I hate you,” she said, “and will never live with you if you do not let
me go back.”

“You will never live with me if I do,” he replied.

“I can escape again,” she said, “when we have saved the Ammi, and then I
will return to you.”

“If it required so much time and fighting,” he replied, “to get you once,
how much will it take to get you again?”

“If I escaped before without your aid, can I not do so again?”

“I am not sure you will want to come back, with all your ape lovers.”

“I shall not want to come back to you, if you do not let me go; but to my
mother and Orlee and the rest I will return. If you care for nothing but
your love you are unworthy of mine.”

But Koree was determined, and would not let her go.

She thus saw all her unselfish sacrifices about to be defeated by a
selfish lover.

The conversation of the Ammi now reverted to the probability of her story
and the advisability of their further retreat.

“Let us wait,” said Abroo, after they had gone some distance into the
Swamp, “till we see the result of the alliances formed by the Apes.”

“I will wait,” said Pounder, “only on condition that we return and
fight them. If what the girl says is true they will soon fall out among
themselves, so that even the cowardly need not fear them.”

“What is to be gained by fighting them at all,” asked Oko, “if they have
nothing that we want?”

“You greedy beast!” returned Pounder, savagely; “is it nothing to
vanquish the Lali? and if all the Monkeys of the forest are collected, is
it nothing to whip them all at once? It is base to make this retreat; and
I have a notion to smash the jaw of the fellow that proposed it.”

“This is not a retreat,” explained Abroo, calmly, “but a movement to
disable the enemy by delay. We shall be better able to fight when they
are less able to coöperate.”

And thus the talk went on for hours, when Koree suddenly interrupted it
with the question:

“Where is Sosee?”




 


[Illustration]

The disappearance of Sosee without anybody knowing it was a new puzzle to
the Ammi. Was she spirited away by some supernatural power? or did she
simply drop out of line into the bushes? These were among the questions
asked.

“She is a spy,” persisted Pounder, “having first become a traitor.”

“If her story be true,” observed Abroo, “she thinks more of her people
than of her lover, and is a great heroine to thus sacrifice her love to
save her race.”

“Whatever be the facts,” said Koree, not appreciating this kind of
unselfishness, “let us search for her. If she be a spy she should not
return to the enemy, and if she be a heroine she should not be lost to
us.”

“In either case,” said Pounder, “you want to get her for yourself, and do
not care what becomes of the war.”

“Let us first make ourselves safe,” said Abroo, “and then talk of finding
her. In this great Swamp with its endless entanglement of bushes, we
could not find her any sooner than the Lali can find us; whereas if we
save ourselves from the danger she describes, we must retreat farther at
once.”

“I shall search for Sosee,” said Koree, “and will return to you only when
I find her.”

So saying Koree left the rest of the Ammi and started back to find his
beloved, taking several friends with him.

They were soon lost in the wilderness; but by the position of the sun
they kept their steps bent in the direction of the Lali.

“There is only one course that she could take,” said he; “whether she go
as a spy or to a lover, she will seek the Lali by the most direct route,
and in either case I want her, and want her soon; so let us head her off.”

Swift then through the wilds they pressed back, pushing aside the bushes,
wading in the marshes, jumping over fallen trees, and picking out a
possible route through an almost impassable country. When they came to
an open place, they reconnoitred. Now and then they met a serpent or
alligator, and continually they feared more savage beasts, whose cries
were heard around them.

“This is a terrible wilderness for Sosee to pass through,” observed
Koree, “but if she is going to meet a rival, or betray the Ammi, I don’t
know whether I want her to get through.”

“We will at least reach the Lali first,” said one of his companions.

“I am not sure of that,” replied Koree. “Sosee is swift of foot, and
finds her way better than anyone I know.”

Soon they came upon some straggling apes, but as these differed somewhat
from the Lali they paid little attention to them, thinking they were
chance hunters in the thickets.

These apes, however, were soon met so frequently, and finally became so
numerous, that Koree remarked:

“I wonder if they are not some of the new comers of which Sosee spoke.”

Presently he climbed a tree, from which he looked beyond the confines of
the Swamp, where he saw an innumerable swarm of apes, filling all the
country about the habitations of the Lali. So many animals he had never
before seen together. His worst suspicions were, therefore, confirmed.

“Sosee has, indeed, reported the truth,” he said; “such a multitude would
have overwhelmed the Ammi in one attack, and left nothing remaining of
the human race.”

Hurrying down, therefore, from the tree, he called on his comrades to
turn back to the Ammi.

“Let us return and take precautions for our safety,” he said; “soon those
apes will scatter, or kill one another off; no country can long support
such a number.”

“But what about Sosee?” asked his companions.

“We cannot find her in this Swamp,” replied Koree; “and, as her story of
the reinforcements of the Apes is true, the rest is not incredible, so
that her return to them may be necessary for our safety.”

Now, therefore, for the first time, did Koree appreciate the heroism of
Sosee; and the sacrifice of her lover seemed magnanimous when it was
clear that it was not for another lover.

They retraced their steps, therefore, and before night were again with
the main body of the Ammi, to whom they related what they had seen.

“Where is Sosee,” asked one.

“We have not seen her,” replied Koree, “but we found her true, which
is more important;” for Koree before his search had begun to doubt the
faithfulness of his beloved, which he was now glad to establish, even at
the expense of her possession.

As night settled down on the Ammi in the Swamp a great light appeared in
the north, an object of beauty and terror to them. The sky was illumined
with brilliant and changing rays, like a sunrise at midnight. The heavens
seemed to be on fire, and the conflagration to be approaching the earth.
It was one of those gigantic electric storms which swept over the ancient
world and vied with the earthquakes, mountain upheavals, and deluges of
the period, when the Earth still acted as a whole. Night and Day were
apparently in conflict, mixing great fields of light with alternate
streaks of darkness, and chasing each other over the whole heavens.

“What can this mean?” asked several at once.

“The Fire-monster is sweeping down upon us, as well as the Monkeys,”
answered one; “he has already seized the heavens.”

“It don’t mean any good,” said Gimbo; “Shoozoo is angry, and has sent his
winged Alligator to destroy us. I will get the dragon-fly which cured us
of the colic.”

Wearied, however, they soon sank to rest, and lying under an open sky,
which seemed all on fire, they slept, and their dreams that night were
disturbed equally by fears of the Aurora and of monkeys.




 


[Illustration]

Several times during the night strange sounds were heard. Once they
were all aroused, thinking the Lali were upon them. At another time
they thought a wild beast was prowling near them, and again that they
heard sounds made by the Aurora Borealis. Near morning, when the first
glimmer of light appeared, there was a rush in the direction from which
came an ominous growl. One after another followed the leader to learn
the cause of it. In their haste the foremost stumbled on a huge living
object, which nearly frightened him to death; while the rest, in their
impetuosity, fell over the same thing, so that soon there was a great
heap of living humanity and wild confusion.

All wondered what had thrown them, and, to increase their wonderment, the
object did not move, but seemed indifferent to the tumbling which they
did upon him. They were afraid to approach, until the light should become
stronger; for they did not as yet have candles to guide them at night,
but had to wait for the day, or else grope in darkness. As it dawned,
however, and things became more distinguishable, one, more venturesome
than the rest, advanced, and, to his relief, found that it was Pounder,
who was rolled up in a heap, and lay before them dead drunk.

Among the roots dug up and eaten by the Ammi, was a species of mandrake,
which had a stupefying effect. Pounder had become fond of this root, or
rather of its effects, and he carried it about with him for occasional
indulgence. His addiction to the habit was, perhaps, the cause of his
quarrelsomeness; for he frequently quarrelled with others, although this
was, perhaps, the first case of well-defined spree known to humanity.

Several of the Ammi, thinking he was dead, rolled him over, and repeated
the rolling several times.

“He is only sleeping,” said one; “see how he breathes;” and they shook
him to wake him.

Presently his eyes opened, when another exclaimed:

“He is neither dead nor asleep, but sick; perhaps he is dying. Call
Gimbo.”

Soon Gimbo, who was doctor, priest and prophet, all in one, approached
with his dragon-fly and long-necked pumpkin, and, after a brief
examination, in which he looked mysteriously wise, said:

“It comes from the colic;” and, with these words, he seized the neck of
the pumpkin, and with the big end pounded the stomach of his patient,
adding: “This will fetch the colic out of him.”

Pounder first grunted, then groaned, and at last opened his eyes.

Gimbo, seeing this effect, congratulated himself, and went on pounding,
saying, “He is coming out all right.”

Pounder who neither understood nor enjoyed this treatment, raised himself
half up, and, to the surprise of all, dealt Gimbo a powerful blow with
his fist, saying, “Get out you old four-footed ape with your big pumpkin!”

He then sank back in his stupor, but placed his hand on his stomach for
protection.

Gimbo, picking himself up, said:

“The disease acts strangely; but he is gaining strength, and will soon be
well.”

He did not recur to the pumpkin treatment, however, but relied henceforth
on the dragon-fly for a cure, which he applied at a distance.

The Ammi now gathered about Pounder, and, with astonishment on their
faces, contemplated the change that had come over him. The mightiest of
their number was seen lying before them the weakest and silliest. It
disgusted them that he should so put himself out of his own power, as to
be at the mercy of the smallest monkey, and especially that he who could
fight so bravely should grin and puke so contemptibly.

But these discussions did not interest Pounder, who slept on unmindful of
his glory or his disgrace.

About this time the Ammi were again heard complaining of the cold, which
had been rapidly increasing since the snow storm mentioned, and they cast
about for devices to reduce its discomforts.

At night they sought the leeward side of trees and hills; they also went
into caves and huddled up closely to keep warm. But this did not suffice.
They were cold both by day and night, and every one sought other means of
warming.

From the habit of covering themselves with leaves when sleeping, the
thought was suggested, that if they could surround themselves with leaves
during the day they might be more comfortable at all times.

“The difficulty is to make the leaves stick together,” said Abroo; “let
us fasten them by their stems, or string them on blades of grass.”

Soon a garment of leaves and grass was woven in this way, which was the
beginning of clothing and of the vast dry-goods interest of the world.

Up to this time the Men, like the Apes, had been naked. They had found no
use for clothing; the climate was warm, and the feeling of shame had not
yet entered their breasts. They were covered with hair, which grew longer
since they had come north; and, though this furnished some protection,
and was highly appreciated since the cold weather set in, it was not
sufficient for their comfort. Some had longer hair than others, and so
stood the change better, while those of little or short hair often fell
sick and died of colds, rheumatism, and other winter complaints. The
invention of clothing, however, equalized their condition again, so that
long hair was deemed of no special advantage.

The leaf-garments, however, did not long satisfy them. They could not
make a fabric of such materials that would stand the rough usage to
which it was subjected. In their running, climbing and other violent
exercises the wreaths broke or became detached, so that it was difficult
to keep them on. One’s whole suit sometimes fell off in an instant,
leaving him in his skin and hair.

“Bark, I think, would do better than leaves,” said Koree, who had made
himself a suit of the inner rind of a tree. He found this so rough,
however, that it soon wore off the hair and skin in places, so that he
looked like a horse galled by the harness.

“Pound the bark to make it soft,” said Watch-the-girls, who had made a
neat garment for herself from well-selected strips of bark, from which
she had removed the rough spots.

“Skins would keep us warm; and they are soft,” said another woman, who
had placed about her shoulders the hide of a sheep which had been used as
a receptacle for darts.

This was an unfortunate discovery for the animals. For in a little while
the Ammi, finding that skins were more desirable than anything else as a
protection from cold, sought animals for their skins, and killed more for
this purpose than they had before killed for food.

The use of clothing in time became general, and the Ammi learned the
important lesson that they were independent of the weather, and could
carry their climate about with them, making it to order.

The use of clothing, however, developed into a dangerous luxury. They
soon came to have preferences, not only on account of warmth and
softness, but on account of appearance. Bright colors were chosen as
most desirable, and those were more in esteem who dressed well. Much of
their time was accordingly given to making garments, especially among the
women, and many bits of decoration were in time added, so that pride and
art were soon developed in dress.

Pounder, however, always despised dress, and would not put on anything
whatever; and several others, who admired his strength and bravery, were
led to follow his example. Gimbo said it was wrong to dress, and that
if people would only keep on all fours they would not need clothes; so
he, as long as he lived, went naked and on all fours, no matter what the
weather or the occasion.

But the men went on in their vanity about dress, until they soon wore
more wool than the sheep; and Gimbo complained that something was wrong
when each animal did not wear its own skin.

Fire-tamer said they might keep warm by getting a wood-eating animal and
keeping it in the camp.

“While I kept mine,” he said, “I was warm. When he shook himself the Cold
fled affrighted, and would not come near again until he disappeared.”

“That’s worse than clothes,” said Gimbo; “don’t bring it here, or we will
all be killed and eaten up.”

“The beast is liable to get loose,” said another, “and attack us any
moment. We have seen what he did at the volcano and in the forest.”

“I will get a young one,” said Fire-tamer, who thought a small fire was
an immature or half-grown animal, and that it could be easily managed.

But the Ammi were afraid, and would not allow the beast to be brought to
the camp, dead or alive; and so they went on shivering, and it took them
some time to shiver into sense.




 


[Illustration]

The next day Fire-tamer, who had been hunting in the Swamp, returned to
the Ammi, with a piece of burning wood. Having seen a tree struck by
lightning, which was nearly consumed, and thinking he understood the
habits of the beast, he raked in the ashes till he found this brand.
Bringing it with him, he thought, as the fire curled on the end of it,
like a snake, that he had caught a wood-eating animal.

“There he comes with a little one,” said Koree, as Fire-tamer approached
the Ammi. Gimbo was horrified, and ran away. The rest, though prohibiting
its introduction the day before, had suffered so much during the night
from cold, that they were now willing to give it a trial, which Gimbo
thought very inconsistent in them.

Fire-tamer laid it down, when, to the surprise of all, it did not run
away. He then brought leaves to feed it, when it flamed up, or became
“mad,” as they thought. None, however, would come near enough to feel its
effects; when they said it was of no use as a warmer.

[Illustration: THE WOOD-EATING ANIMAL IN THE CAMP OF THE AMMI.]

“Wait till he shakes himself,” said Fire-tamer, “and you will get a
fanning from his wings that will warm you all over.”

He then fed the monster with brush, when to the surprise of all, who
now approached with confidence, it ate greedily, and soon warmed them
perceptibly.

“See how he cracks the bones with his teeth,” said Pounder, in admiration
of its strength, as the fire crackled and the sparks flew.

“See what a dust he kicks up,” said another, as he observed the smoke.

A spark at this moment flew out and lighted on Pounder, who gave a growl,
and said the beast had snapped at him. He could scarcely be restrained
from attacking it with his fists.

All were gratified, however, at the warmth produced; for the day was
cold, and they had not on their clothing, or else did not know how to use
it. They accordingly huddled about the fire, and soon came to regard it
as a necessity.

“How can we keep it from running away?” asked one, who thought of their
misfortune when they should be without it.

“How can we take it with us when we move?” asked another. “I would not
like to take hold of it or lead it.”

“Fire-tamer can catch another,” answered Koree, “for he is skilled as a
hunter of this monster, as well as a manager of it.”

They wondered most at the voracity of the beast, who ate all the brush
and logs they could carry to him.

“He grows bigger at once on what he feeds,” said one, as the fire
increased with the supply of several trees; “see how fat he is getting,
and how he struggles at his meals. One would think the tree is alive at
which he is eating, and that he is fighting to kill it, as when a tiger
eats an alligator.”

When the fire died down, and it was not convenient to get more wood,
Cocoanut-scooper threw in some vegetables and fruits, saying:

“I wonder if he will eat these. He seems, like a hog, to eat everything.”

But the fire continued to become less, and all were surprised that it was
fastidious about its food, and would eat nothing but wood.

More wood was, accordingly, brought, and soon the monster had reached its
full size again.

“It does not pay to keep this animal,” said Oko; “it takes all our time
to carry food to him. Loose him that, like the urus, he may wander
through the forest and feed himself.”

“He will eat the whole forest and us too, if he gets loose,” replied
Fire-tamer.

Several approached so near that they got burned, so that many doubted the
utility of the beast on account of its danger. One who got a whiff of
smoke in the face thought he was being attacked, and discharged a dart at
the monster.

“I am afraid to sleep at night with this brute in the camp,” said one;
“he will eat us all before morning.”

“When he appeared last night in the sky,” observed another, referring to
the Aurora, “he did not harm us.”

The people, however, were divided, some wanting to get rid of him, and
others to keep him. When it got warm the beast became unpopular, which
was about the middle of the day; but as it cooled off toward night, he
was more in favor.

“He must be thirsty,” said Pounder; “let us bring water and give him a
drink.”

So saying he went to a pool, and, filling a gourd, poured water on the
fire, which had become low from lack of fuel. The fire immediately went
out, to the surprise of all.

“He hates water and has run into his hole,” said Pounder.

“Let us dig him out,” said Koree, who thought he was a kind of woodchuck
that could be easily unearthed.

On examination, however, they found no hole into which he could have
crawled, and so gave up digging.

“He will come out of a volcano soon,” said Fire-tamer, “and I shall watch
for him in the mountains.”

Gimbo was profoundly thankful, however, that he was gone. He had
worshipped him as a god out of fear; but now that water destroyed him,
he worshipped the water instead, as a greater spirit, and he was nearly
converted to the religion of the Lali, who had great faith in the power
of water, and especially of the water of the great Swamp, in which the
winged Alligator dwelt.

As evening came, however, with its dampness, they again suffered, and
doubt came with their discomforts, and they slept uncertain whether fire
should be the companion of their lives.

And the night was full of stars and Gimbo of fleas, and as they passed
each other on the way of time the problems of life were unfolding to
reason.




 


[Illustration]

The next day the Ammi were startled at the sight of a strange ape, which
was at first taken for one of the Lali, and they thought that the rest
would soon be upon them. He was soon seen, however, to be of a different
species, and so was allowed to pass unmolested. Next a whole group
of apes appeared; but, as they were small and apparently peaceable,
they produced no consternation. It was deemed best, however, to make a
reconnoisance; and so Pounder and Cocoanut-scooper each climbed a tree to
examine the surrounding country.

They reported the Swamp full of apes, which wandered about in groups
apparently without purpose. There were generally a male and three or four
females together.

These were some of the immigrants which had recently come from the
north, and were going south to escape the cold. They had remained a few
days with the Lali, and were now scattering in all directions. The Lali
themselves, they said, had all determined to migrate.

The Ammi, being therefore relieved of their fears, now determined to
return to the battle-field. For, as the reënforcements of the Lali had
dispersed, they thought they could safely fight them again.

They accordingly started back toward the Lali with renewed courage. The
cold was still increasing, and the waters of the Swamp through which
they had come were frozen over. For most of the way they walked on ice,
which made their return easy. They found some animals and birds along the
route, which had been frozen to death, of which they ate as they went,
and from which they re-supplied their stores.

“The cold has made a bridge for us across the waters,” said Koree, “and
we can now walk where we before waded.”

“True,” said Oko, “but it has taken away the water, and we shall have no
fish, and not even anything to drink.”

“It has turned the water into stone,” observed another, “and the land
has all been changed into a white foam, so that we shall hereafter have
neither land nor water.”

The situation was critical indeed. The whole earth seemed about to be
taken from them, or else turned into a new substance, cold, hard and
forbidding.

“What can we do,” asked Oko, “but migrate like the Lali?”

“Splash!” “Splash!” “Splash!”

Such were the sounds now heard in quick succession, and accompanying them
were cries, growls and great confusion.

The ice had broken and let some of them into the water. Pounder,
Cocoanut-scooper, Abroo, Oko, and others were floundering in the waves,
some swimming and others wading to their chins. The whole army was thrown
into a panic. The earth seemed to have given way beneath them, or what
they supposed to be new formed solid rock.

[Illustration: THE AMMI BREAKING THROUGH THE ICE.]

“It doesn’t look as if the water had given out,” growled Pounder, with a
savage glance at Oko.

“I wish it had,” observed Oko, as he tried to keep his head above the
floating ice.

A great scramble now ensued to regain the land, or a footing on solid
ice. Several got to fighting in the water, and there was a great
splashing and series of duckings.

Those who got out stood shivering in the snow, and occasionally tried to
help out others; but most were afraid to go near the place of danger.

When all had regained solid footing it became their chief care not to
break in again. They had evidently met a new danger greater than the
Lali. It was the water of the Swamp, which they had shortly before
bewailed as having gone forever. They moved more cautiously, therefore,
testing the strength of the ice as they proceeded.

Before leaving the scene of the catastrophe, however, Oko, seeking to
turn their misfortune to profit, picked up some pieces of floating ice,
and proposed to take them along.

“These rocks,” he said, “will make good missiles. By using them on the
Lali, we need not throw away our cocoanuts.”

He accordingly filled a skin pouch with them, and carried some in his
arms, while others followed his example. They soon found them, however,
not only heavy and bulky, but having a new inconvenience. They imparted a
sense of discomfort, now know as cold, which, being unknown to them, was
dreaded as mysterious, like the effects of fire.

After marching awhile they were rejoined by Fire-tamer, who had gone in
search of another “wood-eating beast.” He was successful in his search,
and his game was acceptable to the Ammi, who had learned to appreciate
the beast in cold weather. Even Gimbo was secretly glad, though he had to
protest, from force of habit, that they were introducing a demon among
them, and that they might as well be destroyed by the cold as eaten by
the hot monster.

They now all collected brush, and soon there was a roaring fire on the
ice, at which they dried themselves and planned their future movements.
The pieces of ice which Oko and others had carried for weapons, and which
they had laid by the fire to warm, were found to have disappeared. They
had melted and run away. Oko thought somebody had stolen them, and he got
into a fight with Pounder over the matter, when finally a halt melted
piece was seen to be turning into water. They then charged the theft to
the wood-eating monster, which they thought was devouring their rocks.

“He is worse than a hog,” said Oko, “to eat both wood and stone.”

They observed at this time that neither apes nor wild beasts approached
them while they sat by the fire, but turned off at the sight of it with
fear; so that Fire-tamer remarked:

“If we could always have this animal with us, no other danger would come
near.”

It was sometime after this, however, before men took to building fires as
a protection against wild beasts.

They observed also that some of the fruits and roots which
Cocoanut-scooper had tried to warm by placing them near the fire (for
they were frozen) became scorched, or boiled in their own juice, and
thereby much changed in taste. They found them better for the change;
so that they soon sought to do by design what they first did by
accident—prepare their food by fire—which was the beginning of the art of
cooking.

They also discovered that their food, thus treated, was more tender and
wholesome, so that they could eat many things which were before too hard
or tough, and they thereby greatly increased their food, which was a
matter of importance at a time when it was being reduced by the cold.

They also observed that when the fire was burning at night, it illumined
the space about them, making a kind of artificial day. Night fled from
it, as well as Cold and wild beasts, and stayed away as long as it
remained. By its means they could see without sun, or moon or Aurora
Borealis; and to overcome darkness in this way seemed the greatest
triumph yet made by man or beast.

Taking a stick one night which had been lighted at a heap of coals,
Fire-tamer was enabled, by carrying it around, to find a wolf skin which
Koree had lost, and which could not be found in the dark. This opened the
eyes of the Ammi, and from that moment they began to use fire for light,
as well as heat; and that stick was the first candle of the human race.
That day could be carried about in small pieces seemed astounding.

Through this discovery Fire-tamer gradually became the most important
man among the Ammi. Neither the strength of Pounder, nor the courage
of Koree, nor the wisdom of Abroo impressed the populace so much as
the mastery by this man of the wood-eating beast. He was appealed to
in all matters relating to fire. No other would venture to manage the
animal. Fire-tamer came at length to be thought sacred. The beast, it
was believed, dared not touch him. And Fire-tamer artfully used this
mystery to strengthen his influence among the Men. He purposely kept them
in ignorance and fear of the monster. He meant to keep control of this
interest, which he had the wisdom to perceive was soon to become the most
important one among the Ammi. He had, in short, a “corner” on fire, and
meant to keep it.

The awe in which Fire-tamer was thus held, and the influence which he
had in consequence among the people, excited the jealousy of Koree and
other leaders, who saw their own star declining. Several quarrels ensued,
and there was a crisis, when a happy solution was reached by making
Fire-tamer a sort of high priest, whose business it was to have charge
of the wood-eating monster and keep it burning, in return for which
distinction he was to abandon his ambition to control the Ammi in other
matters. His office was the predecessor of that of the vestal virgins,
and his charge—fire—became worshipped as a deity, while he, as keeper of
it, became the chief ruler of men in religious matters.

While they were discussing these interests, and the reciprocal bounds of
church and state were being first laid off, there arose a great commotion
among them.

“Splash!” “Splash!” “Splash!”

Such were the sounds that were now heard a second time; but the terror
was greater than before, and such a scene of confusion had never yet been
known to men.

The fire had melted the ice, which gave way, and men, fire and all went
down into the water. One over another they tumbled, and, amid smoking
logs and sissing embers, struggled with one another and with the floating
ice. The fire was put out, and with it went the prestige of Fire-tamer,
at least for awhile.

Some thought the wood-eating monster had taken a plunge and was running
away with them. They expected to be carried under the ice and into the
ground; and they were much relieved when they found that the monster had
gone alone and left them behind, and, as they gradually regained the
shore, or rather the firm ice, they presented such a mass of shivering
and dripping humanity as had not been seen till that day.




 


[Illustration]

The first impulse of the Ammi, on recovering their safety and their
senses, was to kill Fire-tamer who was thought responsible for the
disaster. He was supposed to know the habits of the beast, and was deemed
negligent in allowing them to be exposed to such a calamity. Pounder
especially favored his death, and proposed to inflict it himself, as he
had been twice submerged that day, and was specially out of humor.

“I knew,” said Gimbo, “that it would come to this; but you never take the
advice of an old man. I don’t walk on four feet for nothing.”

What had become of the beast, was the next question.

“Shall we go after it?” asked one.

Another said: “Let us rather run away from it, and kill Fire-tamer if he
brings another.”

“It would be a good thing to have,” said Koree, “now that we are so cold
and wet.”

“As soon as it should dry us,” replied Pounder, “it would plunge us again
in the water.”

Fire-tamer was puzzled, and it was well that he had nothing to say; for
the Ammi were not in a condition to listen to him. He and his beast were
alike in disfavor, and so he waited for a cold day for his vindication.

The Ammi proceeded on their way, but were terribly afflicted with the
cold, which kept steadily increasing. Their feet and hands suffered
most, for which they had as yet provided no covering. Walking through
the snow and on the ice they had frequently frozen feet. Osa, a young
and pretty girl, admired by many, was completely overcome, and fell back
in the march to die. Aloo, her lover, sought means of taking her along;
but, after carrying her awhile in his arms, and enlisting others to aid
him, he gave up exhausted, but stayed with her while the rest moved
on, resolved to die also. As nothing more has been heard of them it is
believed that they perished together.

As the Ammi marched forward, they heard dreadful reports from the Apes
which they met, of the cold of the north. The whole country was covered
with snow; the rivers were frozen; the trees were dead; the animals had
left the country, or were perishing; great mountains of ice had formed
in the valleys; all fruit had disappeared, and the roots were under the
snow and could not be dug out of the hard ground. In the famine which
accompanied this change animals fell to eating one another, not only the
dead but the living, so that when the survivors reached the south they
were much thinned out.

“It is foolish,” said Oko, on hearing these reports, “to go back to fight
the Lali. Let us rather return home, gather up what is left, and go south
also.”

“Not till Sosee is recovered,” said Koree. “Neither Cold, nor Snow, nor
Famine shall make us desist from war. I mean to march through all these
to where she is, and to take her from the Lali even though they fight
twice as hard as the Storm.”

“She has, no doubt, left long since with some lover among the Lali, and
is now in the south,” replied Oko.

This was a more dreadful thought to Koree than that she should be
perishing in the north. He accordingly gave a savage look and growl at
Oko, and replied:

“Whether she be in the snows or in the arms of a lover, I shall rescue
her.”

He accordingly urged the army to quicken its pace, although to do so,
they had to leave many perishing ones to die. He feared more that they
would not find the Lali than they would, and so hurried to overtake those
whom he had shortly before hurried to escape from.

Watch-the-girls opposed this excessive speed, on account of the many
females in her charge who could not keep up, and whom she was unwilling
to abandon in the snow.

“If we go so fast,” she said, “we will have no forces left when we reach
the Lali, and will have to fight them with our leaders only.”

“I can whip them all myself,” said Pounder, who was eager for the fight,
and thought little of those who perished, whether of the enemy or of his
own people.

Koree, too, urged them to quicker speed, lest the battle, the Lali and
Sosee should all escape, and they themselves should be compelled to
return without glory or the girl. “If I must go south”, he said, “I want
the company of Sosee, and if I must die in the cold, I want to die with
her.”

And so his tenderness for one became cruelty to many; and he led the
forces hastily to the seat of war, while the girls and the weak fell
back, unable to keep up. Watch-the-girls fell back with them, though
abundantly able to go on. She said she would die with her charge, or else
bring them up to the front later on.

And so some remained behind suffering, while others went forward
suffering. Watch-the-girls was equally divided in her attentions between
caring for the dying and getting forward the living.




 


[Illustration]

Meanwhile the Lali, to whom we will now return, had been passing through
a crisis no less serious than that of their enemy. After failing to
overtake the Ammi, whom they had prepared to overwhelm, as we have
related, by amassing against them the fugitives from the north, they
returned discouraged to their camp, there to encounter discontent among
their allies, and finally division. They were even threatened at one time
with extermination by the new-comers, which they averted by inducing the
latter to pass on. The allies accordingly began an exodus, and were soon
out of sight.

But they devoured, before going, nearly all the means of the Lali, and
carried off what they could not eat, so that, with the coming of the
snow and cold, the Lali were left in destitution. This was relieved
by catching some of the animals that had come from the north, and by
gathering those that had perished in the snow. They also learned to eat,
as all do in time of war or famine, many new kinds of food, and gathered
leaves and sprigs, which till then had not been tasted.

The flight of the Ammi before the allied Apes, which has already been
described, proved a serious loss to the Lali. These had hoped, on
conquering the Ammi, to take possession of Cocoanut Hill, and the stores
amassed there; and, had they succeeded, they would have had enough, both
for themselves and their allies, for some time, and could have lived in
comfort.

When, accordingly, it was discovered that Sosee was the cause of the
flight of the Ammi, and so of the misfortunes of the Lali, they resolved
to put her to death.

Several attempts were at once made at this, but singular obstacles arose
from the complications of the Apes with her, which secured her protection
by starting fights among themselves.

One, Hang-from-the-vines, who had led the combined forces in search of
the escaping Ammi, first flew at her, and would have torn her to pieces,
but for the intervention of Ilo and Oboo, who had her in charge. Ilo
seized him by the throat, while Oboo snatched her away to a place of
safety. Hang-from-the-vines now turned in his rage to Ilo, and these
two fought together, and both received bites and scratches; but, as Ilo
fought for love and Hang-from-the-vines for revenge, Ilo was successful,
though the other was the greater warrior.

Ilo marched proudly from his victory over Hang-from-the-vines, expecting
to receive the admiration of the people, and especially of Sosee, who had
been an indifferent lover.

Great was his disappointment, therefore, when Oboo claimed the
girl. “For,” said Oboo, “I rescued her when about to be slain by
Hang-from-the-vines, capturing her from you both, as you had captured her
from the Ammi in the first place. If she was yours then, she is mine now,
and I will keep her.”

This was too much for Ilo. Transported by rage he next sprang at
Oboo; when a fiercer fight ensued than when they both fought against
Hang-from-the-vines. Hair and blood flew; growls and bites came from both
mouths; and, as when the Wind and Snow had recently engaged in battle,
these mighty chiefs filled the air with confusion and wide-resounding
thunders.

But as Ilo fought for his one love, and Oboo for one of many, Ilo was
successful, though he had not fought so often, or won so many victories
as Oboo. He accordingly took possession of Sosee, and, crowned with two
triumphs, hoped to enjoy her forever.

But Oboo, being defeated, next resolved, in his double loss of honor and
lover, to effect her destruction. Whom he could not win he would kill.
This was more, however, from hatred of Ilo than anger at Sosee. He could
not endure that another should take a woman, especially from him; and
so he demanded her death as a punishment to Ilo, though ostensibly for
treachery to the whole. Joining, therefore, in a conspiracy with one whom
he had recently joined in a fight, he proposed to Hang-from-the-vines
that they kill her whom he had just rescued from death.

But Hang-from-the-vines was now in a changed mood, being unwilling to
gratify his recent enemy even by his own success.

“As you would not let me slay her,” he said, “you shall perpetuate your
victory as a defeat, and see her another’s. Preventing her death when she
was false to all, you shall not get me to kill her now because she is
false only to you.”

Oboo, however, was resolved on her death, at least for the moment, and he
easily enlisted others in his design. Oola wanted her to die because she
had won from her the affections of Oboo (which many others, however, had
since obtained). Other women desired her death because she had been their
rival for several lovers, and still others merely because she was pretty
and popular; so that, between her charms and her offenses, she was in
double peril. All, however, urged as a pretext for her death, not their
real reason, but the excuse of her treachery; so that the public welfare
had to bear the odium of their private jealously. Only those having no
interest in her death—the great masses—wanted it on the ground which all
alleged.

Her death, however, was ordered, and she was brought for execution before
the assembled Apes. Several were impatient to tear her to pieces. Oola,
fearing that others, by dispatching her, would deprive her of a coveted
revenge, made a pass at her, but was restrained by a male ape who had
begun to feel an attachment for her. A further delay was caused by a
priest who insisted on sprinkling the scene with Swamp water, which, like
the return of the ship from Delos, required time, during which, like
Socrates, she could still live.

[Illustration: SOSEE’S STRATEGY.]

Meanwhile she looked around for some means of escape. The chances for
this were small, as the last moment had now arrived; but her extremity
made action of some kind necessary.

While, accordingly, the Apes awaited the signal for her death, and the
silence was solemnly intense, she suddenly sprang to her feet, and, with
great animation, pointed to the sky, accompanying her movement with a
shout.

Every eye turned from her, and fixed its gaze on the sky. Those who had
been most intently looking at her, and expected to make the first rush
upon her, were the first to look away, and wildest in casting about their
heads to see what was the matter. There was an instant of general panic;
never did so many monkey heads move so rapidly, or in so many directions.
Nothing was to be seen, which made the search more intense. Many looked
more at the sky than they had ever done before, and some actually
believed they saw something, and were overcome by fright; for when people
see nothing they apprehend a great mystery.

While all eyes were thus fixed on the sky, Sosee, summoning her strength
and fleetness, started to run. Swift as the wind, and as noiselessly, she
passed away. She went in the direction opposite to that in which they
were looking.

For awhile her movements were not observed, but were supposed to be part
of the panic caused by the dash of all to see something; and it was some
seconds before any understood that their captive had broken away, and was
running for her life.




 


[Illustration]

The recapture of Sosee was an easy matter, though she had diverted from
her the attention of all before attempting her escape; and several,
standing near, sprang after her when they recovered from their surprise.

These would have instantly seized her but for Ilo and Oboo. These two
lovers and rivals, notwithstanding their ill success with her, were at
heart unwilling that she should die, hoping each that he might, by some
means, still possess her. Instinctively, therefore, they interrupted the
pursuit.

This was less, however, because they intended her escape, than because
they each resolved that the other should not have her. It was also
because they wanted no one else to have her; for her captor would be
entitled to possess her, and, in the Ape customs, recapture counted
as much as original capture, (since one allowing a female to escape
forfeited his title to her).

The interruption of the pursuit, however, was only temporary. For the
whole body of apes, recovering from their surprise, now rushed after
her. Oboo and Ilo joined in the pursuit, but still took more care that
others should not capture her, than that they themselves should. For they
feared their own success as liable to defeat their purpose. The hope
of each was that she would enter the Swamp, where the other pursuers,
becoming scattered, could not overtake her, when he, (Oboo or Ilo), might
pursue her alone, and make her his own. These lovers, therefore, while
running faster than the rest, managed to stumble in the way of those
nearest her, and especially in the way of each other; so that Sosee was
soon gaining on them all.

But her fleetness was of small avail, as also the rivalry of her
pursuers. The Lali closed upon her from three sides. Had she kept running
in a straight line toward the Swamp she might have escaped; but, just as
she had gained so much on them that she was nearly out of danger, she
changed her course, and, veering to one side, ran almost into the arms
of her pursuers. It was now a matter of only a minute when she would be
caught; and if taken she would be instantly killed, for the more savage
rabble, and not her lovers, were, by this turn, brought nearest her. Why
she made such a dangerous detour was understood by none but herself.

Her pursuers were, therefore, confident, and their concern was now less
about whether she should be captured than about who should capture her;
for the victor would be entitled to possess her—or kill her; so that,
instead of being a race with her, it became a race with one another.

A great bearded gorilla, after a spirited struggle to reach the front,
leaped ahead of the rest, like a racer on the home-stretch, and, with
his hair flying in the wind, and his jaws wide open, was on the point
of seizing her. Panting and furious he stopped for a last spring, which
would have both captured her and felled her to the ground; when a shout
arose from the Lali, which, being a shout of terror, made him stop and
look before leaping.

There was abundant cause for this delay. For suddenly out of the edge of
the Swamp, which Sosee now reached, came in full view the forces of the
Ammi with Koree at their head.

Sosee had dimly descried these a moment before, which was the cause of
her change of course; for she started to meet them by the most direct
route, knowing that if she could maintain her pace but a minute longer
she would be safe.

The great ape who was close at her heels stopped at the sight of the
Ammi, which gave Sosee a moment more to live, and in that moment she
rushed into the arms of Koree and her friends.




 


[Illustration]

Sosee was, therefore, safe for the present.

But the pursuit did not end with the escape of the fugitive. The momentum
of the Apes was too great to let them stop, even when they wanted to.
They accordingly rushed on before they had time to think, and fell upon
the ranks of the Ammi, where their race was suddenly changed into a fight.

Not knowing the numbers of the Ammi, and so not fearing them, the Lali
commenced, before they had yet time to comprehend their situation, to
make the best of it. Turning their eagerness into rage, they resolved
to kill both Sosee and all her race; so that scarcely had she reached a
place of safety when she found that she had carried danger into the ranks
of her friends.

The impact of the Apes on the Men was resistless. It astonished them as
much by its shock as the Men had astonished the Apes by their appearance.

The Ammi were thrown into a panic, and would have taken to flight had
they known where to run, (for the Apes were enclosing them on all
sides). All thoughts of Sosee were forgotten by both sides, and even by
herself. Koree had no time to congratulate himself on her rescue, or the
Lali to reproach themselves for her escape. It was a matter of life and
death to all, and again the fate of the human race hung in the balance.

None fight so well as those who can do nothing else. The Apes, having got
into battle by chance, had to fight to get out; while the Ammi, drawn in
reluctantly, had to eagerly fight back. Both parties, therefore, fought
fiercely, who would gladly have quit altogether had they only known how.
But, having entered a battle which neither could abandon, both felt that
their only escape was through victory. Both therefore fought each other
fiercely as the only way to a mutual peace.

Dreadful, therefore, was the clash of fists and nails and teeth. The air
was filled with cries and the ground with blood. Countless bodies lay in
the snow, and many who escaped freezing, now met slaughter. Death seemed
about to settle like a cloud on both forces, and to cover them all with
one common shroud.

The Lali were both more numerous and more desperate. Having gained an
impetus communicated by their chase, they had every advantage. The Ammi,
though more skilled and better armed, were so taken by surprise that they
could use neither skill nor arms; so that, like the Apes, they fought
chiefly with their fists and jaws.

“Let us retreat to the Swamp,” said Koree, who saw his forces yielding at
all points.

“They won’t let us,” said Abroo, who knew that the Apes, being close,
would follow them, and prevent a second escape.

The only problem thus was how to retreat. There seemed no way of giving
up the fight any more than of continuing it. Any sign of weakening would
encourage the enemy to rally and destroy them all.

They continued, therefore, to fight against hope, but saw that even
battle would soon end them, since only a few now remained to either
escape or be killed.

Oko proposed that they all run, and take each his chance of escape. “By
regaining the Swamp,” he said, “we may be saved by hiding in the bushes.”

Abroo remarked that if they did so the women would be captured, and that
men without women were not worth saving.

“Besides,” said Koree, “if we hide in the Swamp, they will track us in
the snow.”

“There is nothing to do but fight,” said Pounder, who exhibited great
courage during all the encounter. “Let us make one desperate effort, and
kill as many Apes as we can before dying.”

This seemed their only hope, which was born of despair; and they resolved
to make a strong effort though in weakness.

Before exhausting that hope in their own extinguishment, Koree looked
sadly upon Sosee, and uttered these words as a last farewell:

“Bitter it is to die now that I have rescued you, and when it would be
so sweet to live. But it is more glorious to die after success than if
you were still in the hands of the Lali. Since, therefore, we cannot live
together, let us die together.”

Sosee, however, heeded not his despairing words, but continued fighting.
For scarcely had she gained the ranks of the Ammi when she turned on her
pursuers, and was one of the fiercest combatants against them.

“Rally to the fight,” she said, “and don’t give up to die while you have
power to kill.”

Her resolution was contagious, so that new spirit was infused into
the Ammi; and, had there been more for the contagion to spread among,
her words would have proved their salvation; but it was an enthusiasm
imparted to the helpless.

While, therefore, they looked to see the enemy rush upon them, bearing
with them Death, they were in a mind to receive this double enemy with
fortitude.

Suddenly a commotion was observed among the Lali. Apparent consternation
seized them, and they seemed about to retire from the field at the moment
of their complete victory.

The cause of this consternation was that reënforcements had suddenly come
to the Ammi, and from a quarter least expected. It was not Night that
had opportunely settled down upon them, as it had before upon the Lali
when it saved them from destruction. Nor was it a blinding Snow that beat
in their faces; as if the skies had come down to attack them by storm.
Instead of the Heavens it was the Earth that furnished their last relief.

Watch-the-girls, who had fallen back, as we have related, and could not
keep up in the march through the Swamp, because of the cold and fatigue
of her troops, now appeared in sight with her female warriors. Left to
die these heroines had fought their fate and conquered the elements, and
they now came up to succor those who had forsaken them, thus offering
salvation in return for abandonment. They were first seen by the Lali,
whose faces, in fighting, were turned toward them; and this sight was the
cause of their confusion.

Out from the Swamp and into the field these women rushed. Fatigue had
left them for a while, and the cold had loosed its grasp. Courage took
the place of weakness, and they rushed into battle without thought of
their condition. Those who were thought not strong enough to live were
now found able to fight.

As when Bluecher appeared to the Allies at Waterloo, and turned the
fortunes of war, so Watch-the-girls came at the critical moment, and,
with new troops, entered the fight and brought back hope.

Weak as they were after their long march and privation, these women
fought with bravery, and persisted to the end. The Lali, who had already
seized the victory, now released their grasp, and, falling in great
numbers, laid hold on Despair instead. Thrown first into confusion, and
then into rout, they found it impossible to longer continue the contest,
and so fled from the field.

Thus the victory was won by the Ammi, and the human race was saved.




 


[Illustration]

The Lali being defeated, the next question with the Ammi was what to
do with them. Pounder proposed that they follow them up and kill them
all. Oko seconded this, so far as to follow them up, but suggested that
instead of killing them, they simply take what they have, and let them
go; for his idea of war was robbery.

“Whether they be dead or not,” he said, “does not matter provided we have
their booty.”

Koree having obtained Sosee, the object for which he went to the war, was
willing to abandon the conflict, and return home without anything else.

“There is nothing to fight for now,” he said; “and nothing that we can
get here will be as good as what we can enjoy at home.”

Sosee seconded this proposal, having learned to love the Lali
notwithstanding her captivity among them; and she did not wish to add to
their distress.

“And let us go quickly,” she said, “or Oboo and Ilo will find means of
attacking us again.”

This suggestion about his rivals confirmed Koree in his conviction that
it was best to return home.

After further consultation it was finally agreed to return at once to
Cocoanut Hill.

Here, accordingly, the Ammi parted forever from the Lali, and the
separation proved the greatest turning point in the world’s affairs. The
Lali became lost to history, like the Ten Tribes, and have been since
sought as the “Missing Link.” Wandering for generations in the Cold and
Famine they finally became extinct, the last of a numerous race. Passing
out of the world, as well as out of history, they will be sought forever
in vain. Only under glacial beds, amid fossil bones, may their relics now
be traced.

As the Ammi were making preparations for their homeward march, Oko
suggested that, before departing, they gather up all they had; and he
even went among the dead to see if he could find anything valuable on the
field.

With Cocoanut-scooper and Abroo he then took charge of the baggage,
including their provisions.

“For,” said Cocoanut-scooper, “the Swamp is covered with snow, so that we
may not be able to forage along the way as we did when we came.”

The preparations for the return march were soon completed, being few and
simple, so that in a little while the Ammi were on their way back to the
Cocoanut Hill region.

The snow was deep, and the way difficult, so that, like the march of
Napoleon from Moscow, this return of the Ammi was a journey of suffering
amid ice and snow and privation.

Gladly as the Greeks, who, when led back from Persia by Xenophon, beheld
with tears the Euxine Sea, and cried out with joy, “The Sea!” “The Sea!”
so the warriors of this earlier Anabasis, when they came to the Lake
where they had left their fleet, expressed great joy at the sight of the
shores beyond, which recalled their homes.

They would have shed tears, but having only recently learned to laugh,
they had not yet learned to weep.

The rafts which they had left moored to the shore were fast in the ice,
except one which had fallen to pieces and was now seen strewn about as
stray logs.

But they had no need of rafts; for the water was frozen and they walked
across easily on the ice.

After some small adventures they reached at last their homes with joy,
and the great expedition to the Lali, and their battles with them, were
at an end.

But they found, on reaching home, that their country was much changed.
All was covered with snow where they had left a green earth and tropical
foliage. The swarms of animals which had come from the north, like the
Goths, had, like them, swept away every vestige of improvement, and
devoured the fruits of the neighborhood. The trees which they had left
laden with mangos, figs and nuts, were now bare, their branches breaking
with snow instead of fruit. The Swamp itself seemed deserted, the life
which had filled it being dead or departed.

Their families too, had been depleted. Of those left behind some had
been slain by the cold or famine, while others had wandered away. It was
a desolate home, therefore, to which the returning warriors came, like
Greece when it was regained by the soldiers after the Trojan War.

[Illustration: RETURN OF THE AMMI TO COCOANUT HILL.]

Pounder discovered that some one had taken possession of his wife in his
absence, or of the woman who most nearly corresponded to such personage,
and he immediately slew him, and took her back. The two illegitimate
lovers had in his absence driven out many of the other Ammi who had
remained at home, and taken possession of what was left in their huts.
All this Pounder now took charge of, along with the woman.

One of their number had been lost, and did not return for many years.
He wandered about the Swamp, visiting its many shores, and meeting,
like Ulysses, many strange kinds of apes and other beasts. Long did he
search for his home, and many times he came near the edge of the Swamp,
in sight of Cocoanut Hill; but a perverse mistake each time drove him
farther away. He wandered among thickets and vines, crossed streams and
hid in marshes. He lived on roots dug from under the snow, and on fish
caught under the ice. He suffered many pains and aches and bruises, still
seeking his home. Twice he was chased by the mastodon, and four times he
fought with catamounts. The stars seemed to wander from their places so
that he could not even recognize the heavens; and when he emerged at last
from the Swamp it was to look upon an unknown country. Like the Wandering
Jew he found no rest for his feet, but went on forever, never finding
what he sought. Climbing banks and trees, and walking over ice and rocks,
he yet saw nothing familiar, but always something new; and when at last
he came within sight of his dwelling it was found to be under a mountain
of ice; and as he started to go south, he turned, with his usual fate,
to the north, and the traditions of the Ammi say that he is wandering to
this day.




 


[Illustration]

As the cold continued and strengthened, and about all the animals had
left the Cocoanut Hill region, the Ammi began to consider whether they
also should not migrate. They had resisted the change of climate thus far
by building mounds, adding to their clothing, and habitually using fire.
(For they had given up their superstition about this element, to whom it
long since ceased to be a God, and was now not even an animal.)

By these and similar devices they could live in the cold longer than
other animals, and they made many improvements in their condition, which
would have defied the weather had it been of an ordinary kind. But a
glacial period had set in, which was to last, not for a winter, but for
an age. The snow was falling that was to pile up in mountains, and to
march for centuries over the land as glaciers, and no life could resist
it; and hence, when they were satisfied that there was to be no thaw, or
early return of warmth, they asked themselves whether they should not
abandon their homes and their country.

“The cold has come to stay,” said Cocoanut-scooper, “and we cannot always
dig for a living. The hogs and tapirs which excel us in rooting, have
left, and we should not try to live where a hog can’t.”

“Our fingers and toes are frozen,” said Gimbo, “and if we don’t soon get
away we will have nothing to walk away with.”

“How do we know,” asked Koree, “that we will find it better elsewhere?”

“I notice,” replied Abroo, “that none of the birds or beasts that go are
ever seen to come back, and they all go one way.”

“Perhaps they are frozen, and can’t return through the snow,” remarked
Koree.

“The birds, which do not have to walk, do not come back any more than the
beasts,” retorted Abroo.

“I think,” said Gimbo, “that any place where one can’t walk on four feet
is no place to live,” and he raised himself up on his hind feet to warm
his hands by blowing them—a method that they had only recently learned.

At this moment a great roar was heard in the mountains, and a shaking
of the earth like that which followed the upheaval of the Alps. A rush
of snow descended from a high peak, crashing into the valley below, and
burying everything beneath it. It was the first avalanche seen by man,
and it laid the foundation of a mighty glacier which was to be followed
by others in its march across the country.

The Ammi were frightened at this new wonder, and thought that part of
the sky had fallen, and that the gods would come next. Gimbo died from
the fright, not so much because of what he saw and heard, as from the
expected descent of the gods. Thus passed away the last four-footed man.

After regaining their composure they quickly decided to flee from the
Cold, the Famine and the falling Heavens.

It was, accordingly, determined to go South; and they immediately began
preparations for the exodus.

As soon as they were ready, they therefore left their ancient Paradise of
Cocoanut Hill—the first Eden of the Human Race—driven by the cold, bleak
God of Snow; but they sought another Eden.

As they started South, Koree and Sosee led the way, not caring whither
they went, so they went together.

They directed their steps toward Egypt and Western Asia, whence their
ancestors had come.

They soon got beyond the snow, and out of their sufferings; for
the glacial region did not extend far south of Cocoanut Hill. They
accordingly had abundant fruits and mild climate for their journey, and
they proceeded with merriment, as well as regret, stopping often and
delaying long where the country through which they passed pleased them.

They were soon beyond the Alps, which they did not, like Napoleon and
Hannibal, have to scale; but many of the present peaks and ridges were
not yet thrown up in the air, so that they easily passed through the
defiles on level ground.

Nor were they stopped by the Mediterranean; for that sea did not then
exist in its present extent. The whole surface of Europe, indeed,
differed from its present contour. Spain was still connected with Africa
at Gibraltar, and Italy at Sicily; while the British Isles were still
joined to the continent. It was subsequent convulsions that first tore
the continents apart, and sent deluges over Europe. For the upheaval of
the Alps, already mentioned, was to be followed by others still greater,
which would upset the basins of the old world, and spill their contents
over nearly all Europe, destroying its life.

It was not difficult, therefore, for these primitive pilgrims to make
their way to the tropics; and, like the Phocaeans, they went resolved
never to return; and not for many centuries was Man again seen in Europe
or the North.

The region that was covered with snow remained a waste for ages; and it
was, according to a prophecy of the Ammi, to continue unpeopled, until
one of the descendents of Koree and Sosee should return, and, under the
name of Adam, (Ammi or Man) recapture Cocoanut Hill, and enter again the
North as a Paradise Regained.

But some said that the man who should thus re-people the North would be
the lost one mentioned in the preceding chapter, who would wander till
the appointed time in Alligator Swamp; and they maintained also that he
would then be found to be no other than the faithful Aloo, who had fallen
back with Osa to die; that on account of their faithfulness these two
lovers would not be destroyed by cold, or hunger, or fatigue, or time;
but that, overcoming all hardships, they would wander on until the Sun
should come again; when they would find rest at last amid the retreating
snows, and there start a new race, after all others had passed out of
history.




INGERSOLL BEACON


A spicy little monthly at 50 cents a year.

Edited by—WM. H. MAPLE

Devoted to Science, Free Thought and the Gospel of Reason and Good Cheer,
in contrast with the “foolish forms and cringing faiths” of theology.

    It comes to hail the morning
      Of re-enfranchised man,
    To sound aloud the warning
      Of priest-craft’s dangerous plan.

SUBSCRIBE NOW!

Every Number is Worth the Price for a Year

    INGERSOLL BEACON CO.
    CHICAGO




ONE OF THE STRONG BOOKS OF THE AGE.

NO “BEGINNING”

OR THE FUNDAMENTAL FALLACY.

BY WILLIAM H. MAPLE.


“The links of its logic are riveted very firmly together, and “No
Beginning” is simply unanswerable.”

This work _demonstrates_ the non-existence of a “first cause” for the
material universe, and proves the oneness of God with Nature.

It denies supernaturalism in all its forms, and claims that reason alone
leads to truth. Nature, it holds, is ever changing in form, but is
eternal in substance, and in its entirety constitutes the only absolute.

It is believed to be the only book in existence claiming to prove, with
the certainty of a mathematical demonstration and along common-sense
lines of thought, the negative of the above mentioned old theological
premise. In this respect it is at once =a curiosity of literature= and a
powerful auxiliary in the cause of rationalism _versus_ superstition.

_Its aim is to aid in popularizing a reasonable conception of the
universe in place of the old notion of its supernatural origin and
control, to the end of lessening superstition and intolerance, and that
both politics and ethics may be made to rest on scientific truth instead
of pretended supernatural revelations._

It shows how the infallibility of the Pope and other cardinal church
doctrines have grown out of the old belief in the “creation” of the
universe out of nothing, and incidentally it is made to appear that
religious controversy must eventually narrow down to an issue between
Rationalism and Catholicism.

The closing chapter deals with Herbert Spencer’s argument for an
“Unknowable Absolute,” and, to quote the Chicago _Chronicle_, “amounts to
a very drastic, indeed, destructive criticism.”

=Third Edition: 183 pages, two striking illustrations. In neat cloth
binding, 75 cents; in paper binding, 35 cents, postpaid.=

=ADDRESS: INGERSOLL BEACON CO., CHICAGO.=

☞ For testimonials, see next two pages.


What They Say of “No Beginning.”

“Is the strongest book on earth.”—_A correspondent in the Truth Seeker._

“It is a volume that should be in every Freethought
library.”—_Freethought Magazine, Chicago._

“As a champion of reason, one of the very strongest essays we have ever
read.”—_Boston Ideas._

“One of the most comprehensive and conclusive works on the subject we
remember seeing.”—_Truth Seeker, New York._

“I doubt very much whether more thoughts were ever compressed into 183
small pages of print.”—_T. M. Stuart, Attorney._

“It is the most sensible treatise on the question of a first creation
ever published and should be taught in the public schools. The book is a
credit to the intelligence of the age.”—_Santa Ana, (Cal.) Bulletin._

“The argument is unanswerable.... The book will at once appeal to the
reason of every reader, and leave him more amazed than ever at the
prevalence of the theory of Creation.”—_The Arena, Boston._

“He employs the resources of both logic and scientific discovery in a
convincing and common-sense way, and ought not to offend the feelings of
the most orthodox who is willing to argue honestly.”—_Review of Reviews,
New York and London._

... “In my judgment it surpasses anything that has ever been written on
the subject.... Every thinking man and woman on earth should be sure to
read the book, as they will learn something that will live in their minds
as long as memory lasts.”—_T. J. Edwards, M. D., Oblong, Ill._

“I consider it one of the greatest masterpieces along its line ever
written. With one blow the author knocks out the First Cause theory
for the material universe, and, with the clearest and most logical
reasoning, he causes the veil of orthodox superstition to rend from top
to bottom.”—_P. M. Harmon, late Pastor of the People’s Church, at Spring
Valley, Minn._

“It deserves a place among the strong books of the age ... evolves a
world which bristles with life and thought.... To me as entertaining as a
story.”—_Moses Folsom, St. Paul, Minn._

“The links of its logic are riveted very firmly together, and ‘No
Beginning’ is simply unanswerable.... The book is a rare gem of precious
thought and will do great good in the world.”—_Dr. W. H. Gibbon,
Chariton, Iowa._

“While the author’s smooth, argumentative style, logical methods and
cogent reasonings, exhibit the keen conception and consummate skill
of a well-trained legal mind, the kindly spirit of toleration of
views, adverse to the thought presented, reveals the generous-hearted,
noble-souled manhood with which the author is inspired.”—_Chariton (Iowa)
Herald._

STRIKINGLY BOLD AND ORIGINAL.

“The book is a strikingly bold and original argument, ... is compact,
systematically built up and controversially formidable.... It [the
last chapter] amounts to a very drastic, indeed, destructive criticism
of Herbert Spencer’s argument for an ‘Unknowable Absolute.’”—_Chicago
Chronicle._

A WELCOME BURST OF SUNSHINE.

“A second and more careful reading of ‘No Beginning’ confirms the
favorable opinion formed from the first reading. The clearness,
thoroughness, lucidity of style, reasonableness and profound wisdom
of this invaluable volume hold the attention, convince the judgment
and command the most unqualified admiration. I know of no man, however
extensive his research or well disciplined his reason, who would not
receive benefit by a careful examination of this work, while to the
average thinker it must prove like a welcome burst of sunshine through a
rift in obscuring clouds. A friend of mine who had just finished reading
the book, emphatically remarked to me: ‘I would rather be the author of
that book than to be president of the United States,’ and to my mind,
the sentiment did credit to his judgment and character.”—_George W.
Morehouse, author of “The Wilderness of Worlds.”_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of From Monkey to Man, or, Society in the
Tertiary Age, by Austin Bierbower

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FROM MONKEY TO MAN, OR ***

***** This file should be named 63379-0.txt or 63379-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/3/7/63379/

Produced by Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org



  ALL WHO LOVE THE BIRDS FOR THEIR
  OWN SAKES,

  who desire to cultivate comradeship with them in books
  and in the field, and who will study them
  with the glass and without the gun._




BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION


To know the birds intimately, to interpret their lives in all their
varied conditions, one must get close to them.  For the purpose of
accomplishing this object the author of this volume has gone to their
haunts day after day and watched them persistently at not a little cost
of time, effort, and money.  While the limits of a single volume do not
permit him to present all of his observations, it is hoped that those
here offered will be satisfactory as far as they go, and that the
reader will be able to glean from these pages some new as well as
interesting facts relative to bird life.

The writer has had another purpose in view in preparing this book: He
wishes to inspire others, especially the young, to use their eyes and
ears in the study of the enchanting volume of Nature.  This object, he
believes, will be best accomplished by furnishing concrete examples of
what may be achieved by earnest research.  For purposes of stimulus an
ounce of example is worth a pound of precept.  If another sees you and
me doing a thing joyfully, earnestly, we need scarcely say to him, "Go
thou and do likewise."

There is not much in the book that is technical, yet it aims at
scientific accuracy in all of its statements, no bird being described
whose status in the avian system has not been determined.  If strange
exploits are sometimes recited, the author has simply to say that he
has been veracious in all of his statements, and that all the stories
are "true bird stories."  The author modestly believes that it will not
be found uninteresting to nature lovers in general.

Much of the material included in this volume has previously appeared in
various periodicals, to the publishers of which the writer would hereby
make grateful acknowledgment for their courtesy in waiving their
copyright privileges.  A number of the journals are given due credit
elsewhere in the book.



Why should not people ride natural history hobbies as well as other
kinds of hobbies?  Almost all persons become interested in some special
study, recreation, or pastime, and their choice is not always as
profitable as the selection of a specific branch of nature lore would
be.  The writer confesses that he would rather pursue a bright, lilting
bird or butterfly than a bounding tennis-ball or football, and he finds
the chase every whit as exciting and the knowledge gained of more
permanent value; and he says this without in anywise intending to
discountenance healthful games and athletic exercises, but simply to
express a preference.  What could be more fascinating, for instance,
than for a young person--or an older person, either, for that
matter--to spend his leisure in trying to identify every bird in his
neighborhood?  As a result of such an attempt he would doubtless become
so interested in the study of his bird neighbors that he would resolve
to learn all he could about their charming habits.

How may one study the birds intelligently?  That is a question every
beginner will want to have answered.  When I began my bird studies I
spent much valuable time in simply trying to learn the _modus
operandi_, and while I do not consider the time thus spent entirely
wasted, still I am anxious to save my readers as much needless effort
as possible.  This I shall do by showing them how they may begin at
once to form an acquaintance with the various families and species of
birds.

It goes without saying that, to become a successful nature student, one
must have good eyes, strong limbs, nimble feet, and, above all, an
alert mind.  People who lack these qualities, especially the last, will
not be likely to pursue the noble science of ornithology.  The stupid
sort will prefer to drowse in the shade, and the light-minded will care
only for the gay round of social pleasures.  Any bright and earnest
person, however, can in good time become an expert student of the
feathered creation, provided only that he feels a genuine interest in
such pursuit.  No one, let it be repeated, can study nature
successfully in a dull, perfunctory spirit.  Here, as in religion, one
must have the baptism of fire, the temper of devotion.

In the study of birds it must be admitted that men and boys have some
advantage over their cousins of the gentler sex.  Men folk may ramble
pretty much where they please without danger, whereas the freedom of
women folk in this respect is somewhat restricted.  However, the
engaging works of Mrs. Olive Thorne Miller, of Mrs. Florence M. Bailey,
and of many others prove that women are not debarred from outdoor
studies, and that in some ways they may even have an advantage over
men; they are not so ambitious to cover a wide territory, to penetrate
to out-of-the-way haunts, or to roll up a long "list," and they are
therefore apt to make more intimate studies of the common species, thus
getting into the very heart of the bird's life.  A man's observations
may embrace a wider range, and he may add more species to the science
of ornithology than his sister, but she will be likely to discover
facts about the commonest fowl that he will overlook.  The study of
birds, therefore, offers a fascinating field for girls and women as
well as for their brothers.

What tools are needed for acquiring bird lore?  To begin at the
beginning, let me ask: Who would expect to study the plants and flowers
without a botany? or the rocks and fossils and the general structure of
the earth without a reliable work on geology? or the planets and stars
without a treatise on astronomy?  So, if you desire a knowledge of
ornithology, you will need what is known as a bird "key," or "manual,"
or "handbook"--that is, a scientific work that shows how the birds have
been classified, with accurate descriptions of all the families,
genera, species, subspecies, and varieties, together with the common
and scientific names of all the species and brief accounts of their
ranges and general habits.  When you have found a plant or a flower
that is new to you, what is your first task?  To "run it down" in a
botanical key.  Just so, having found a feathered stranger, you should
note its markings, shape, size, etc., and then "run it down" with the
aid of a bird manual.  It is much better to run a bird down in this way
than to shoot it down.

It is pertinent to say at this time that no one should disparage
scientific treatises, or the learned and painstaking people who gather
the material for them and prepare them.  It is quite the fashion
nowadays, when a "popular" book on birds appears, for some reviewers to
compare it with the so-called "dry" scientific works of the
specialists, to the disparagement of the latter.  This is as wrong as
it is gratuitous.  The "popular" book, delightful as it may be, could
not have been written, or, if written, would have had little real
value, had it not been for the help obtained from the systematists,
who, with almost infinite toil, have made possible the scientific
classification of the numerous members of the bird tribe.  Pioneer work
in ornithology, as elsewhere, may not be very enchanting to most
people, but it is necessary.  The scientific spirit should be honored,
not disdained, for without it accuracy would be impossible.  On the
other hand, the man who plods with scientific details should not look
with contempt upon the man who popularizes the results of technical
study by giving it an attractive literary setting.  In short, the
scientific writer and the "popular" writer are alike worthy of
"honorable mention," for both of them are needful factors in the
dissemination of knowledge.

You will want to know where a first-rate bird manual can be obtained.
It affords me sincere pleasure to recommend two works of the kind that
cover the entire avian field for residents of the United States.  They
are new, up-to-date, and convenient.  To those who live east of the
Mississippi River I would commend Mr. Frank M. Chapman's "Handbook of
Birds of Eastern North America."  The best praise I can bestow upon
this book is to assure you that it will give entire satisfaction as a
handbook.  Happily another manual (Mrs. Florence M. Bailey's "Handbook
of Birds of the Western United States") was recently issued, treating
the avifauna west of the Mississippi just as thoroughly as Mr.
Chapman's work deals with that of the eastern part of our country.
Both books contain lavish illustrations by expert and accurate bird
artists--a feature that is invaluable in the work of identification.
They possess a further advantage in not being too large to be carried
with you in your excursions afield, enabling you to name each feathered
stranger on the spot.

Should you desire a single volume that will help you to identify any
bird you may meet on our continent, I would urge you to secure the
latest revised edition of Dr. Elliott Coues's "Key to North American
Birds."  It is fully illustrated, thoroughly scientific and up-to-date
in the matter of classification, and yet not too technical for
practical use.  This book is too bulky to be carried with you to the
haunts of the birds, but it may be used in this way: Note carefully the
markings and other peculiarities of each new bird you meet; then, as
soon as you return home, while all the circumstances are fresh in your
memory, consult your "key" and make sure, if possible, of the identity
of all your "finds."

Mr. Robert Ridgway, one of the foremost ornithologists of our country,
is now preparing a great work which is worthy of the highest praise.
It is entitled "The Birds of North and Middle America," and is the most
comprehensive work yet undertaken relative to the avifauna of the
entire North American Continent, giving a large amount of scientific
data respecting all the species.  After its completion it will enable
the student to identify every bird known to science from the Isthmus of
Panama to the far North and from the Atlantic to the Pacific.  At this
writing two volumes have been issued.  They are published under
government auspices by the United States National Museum at Washington,
D. C., and may be procured perhaps without cost by writing to the
secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.  Of this the writer cannot be
absolutely sure, as the supply of printed copies may be limited.

Nothing more need be said about bird manuals, save to warn you against
spending your money for books which describe only a part of the
avifauna of a given region and yet are advertised as serviceable for
the identification of all birds.  Unless you have plenty of money to
spend, when you buy a manual buy one that is scientifically accurate
and complete.  Nothing is more trying to the student of birds, whether
tyro or expert, than to encounter a new bird and then fail to find it
described or even mentioned in the book that has been foisted upon him
as a manual.  In saying this I do not mean to discourage the purchase
of the charming popular books written in a literary vein and describing
personal observations on bird life, such as the works of John
Burroughs, Bradford Torrey, Olive Thorne Miller, and many others.
These books, however, are not advertised as handbooks, and thus no one
is deceived in buying them.

Even with the best manual in hand, you must not expect to be able to
identify every new bird at the first attempt, for some species are
either exceedingly shy or obscurely marked, or probably both, while
quite a number are so much alike in markings and habits that it is hard
to distinguish them from one another.  A few birds remained enigmas to
me for a number of years, in spite of the help of the field glass.  At
intervals for several months you will often catch provoking glimpses of
some nymph-like bird before you succeed in determining its true place
in the avian system.  But patience and persistence will some day
overcome the most stubborn difficulties.

Since the foregoing references to leading bird manuals were written, a
new work, which is unique in plan, has been published.  I refer to the
book entitled "Color Key to North American Birds"; text by Frank M.
Chapman, pictures by Chester A. Reed.  The range of the volume is from
the Atlantic to the Pacific ocean and from the southern boundary of the
United States to the far north.  It contains a brief description of
every species and sub-species within the limits named; a key to all the
Orders and Families, with the common and scientific names of all the
birds; an introduction to every chief division; and last, and highly
important, colored pictures of all the species and many of the
geographical varieties.  What more can the bird student desire for
purposes of identification?  While the other manuals give fuller
descriptions of habits, songs, etc., and need not, therefore, be
superseded by this volume, yet frankness forces us to say that if the
student, and especially the beginner, cannot afford to buy more than
one bird book, the Chapman-Reed "Color Key" is the one to get.  It is
of a convenient size for carrying afield, so that a feathered stranger
can be identified on the spot.  It can be used anywhere in the United
States, in British America, and Alaska.  Think of that, fellow
bird-lovers!

A good field glass is indispensable to successful bird study,
especially if you desire to name all the birds without killing any, as
I hope you do.  Perhaps the older ornithologists, like Audubon and
Wilson, did not use helps of this kind, but they used guns, and
consequently had to study dead birds, while you and I want to study
living ones.  Their killing of birds was, indeed, necessary, for
purposes of scientific classification; but now that such classifying
has, for the most part, been attained, the gun has largely gone out of
vogue, and the glass has taken its place.  Let your alliterative motto
be: _With the glass, not the gun_.

I would advise you not to buy a flashily colored glass, for it will
dazzle your eyes on sunshiny days.  Be sure to get one that is easily
focused, as you must be quick in studying such shy creatures as the
birds.  At first the glass may strain and tire your eyes, but that
difficulty will pass in a short time.  Expertness will soon be won in
the use of a binocular, so that you will be able, almost instantly, to
get the desired object within its field, even though the object be
quite tiny.  An opera glass is a great deal better than no glass at
all; a field glass is better still, and a Bausch & Lomb binocular of
six to eight magnifying power is the best of all; being almost equal to
having the bird in hand.  The observer must lose as little time as
possible in sighting a shy bird, or it may escape him altogether.

A book-bag or haversack, strapped around your shoulders, will also be a
convenience.  In it you can stow your bird manual, and a luncheon in
case you expect to spend the whole day in the open, for a hungry
rambler is not likely to be an acute observer.  A notebook and a lead
pencil, carried in handy pockets, should not be forgotten.  Donning an
old suit of clothes, you can roam where you will, threading your way
through brier and bush, wading the bog or the shallow stream, dropping
upon your knees, even flinging yourself upon the ground, to spy upon a
wary bird flitting about in the copse.

In almost all kinds of weather I wear rubber boots in my excursions to
the haunts of the birds.  The observer can never tell when he may have
to wade a stream or tramp through a boggy marsh.  In wet and cold
weather the need of rubber boots can be seen readily, but even in dry
and warm weather they have one decided advantage--they do not become
slippery on the soles as one tramps through the leaf-strewn woods or
the grassy fields.  Every pedestrian knows that sole-leather is apt to
become as smooth as glass, making it difficult to retain one's footing.
On the other hand, rubber seems to cling to the ground, no matter how
much it is worn.  The only objection to rubbers is that they are
uncomfortably warm in hot weather; but that difficulty can be overcome
by frequently plunging into a cool stream and standing there for
several minutes.

Let me caution you, however, not to purchase a _heavy_ pair of rubber
boots.  Insist on having a light pair or none at all.  A good pair of
rubber boots are a real luxury, for with them you may tramp about in
all kinds of damp and boggy places without fear of wetting your feet,
though it goes without saying that you must be careful not to wade in
over the tops of your footgear.

Of great assistance to the pedestrian is a light cane.  In climbing
Pikes Peak one evening after dark, I doubt whether I should have been
able to gain the summit had it not been for my tough little wild-cherry
cane, upon which I could lean when almost exhausted, which supported my
faltering steps, and which happily never grew weary.  Two years later
it helped me to scale a number of snow-capped mountains, among them
Grays Peak and Peak Number Eight of the Ten Mile Range.  Indeed, my
little cane was of so much service to me that I came to look upon it as
a personal friend that cared almost as much for me as I did for it.  It
pushed aside thorny bushes and nettlesome weeds when I was looking for
nests, thus saving my hands many a painful wound.  And more than one
serpent, including the rattlesnake, has had his head crushed or his
spine broken by sturdy blows from my little wild-cherry cane.  I should
add that it had a hooked handle, so that I could hang it on the strap
of my haversack when I needed both hands.

In the beginning of your observations you will find the work of
identifying the birds a rare and exciting pleasure; then, after you
have named all the species in your neighborhood, it will be no less
delightful to study their interesting ways, or to extend your
researches to other fields.  And if at any time you observe some odd
bits of bird behavior which you think will be news to the many bird
lovers the world over, why should you not report them to one of the
bird magazines, so that others may share the pleasures of your
discoveries?  An admirer of feathered folk should not be selfish;
indeed, I do not see how he can be.

It simply remains to be said that this volume is an illustration of the
method of bird study just indicated.  In the first place, I shall show,
in a few chapters, how the student goes about his work of identifying
species and making new bird friends; then will follow a number of
monographs indicating how much may be learned about the life histories
of several interesting species; next there will be a miscellaneous
collection of incidents of bird life, showing how many odds and ends
the industrious and observing rambler may gather by the way; and,
finally, the book will conclude with four somewhat technical chapters
on bird education, bird music, bird flight, and bird feet, which I hope
will prove interesting as well as instructive.




MAKING NEW FRIENDS

A friend once told me of a letter he had received from a correspondent
who is an enthusiastic botanist.  The writer, having just returned from
an excursion in which he found a flower that was new to him, gave vent
to his feelings of exultation by exclaiming, "Oh, the joy! the joy!"  A
like experience comes to the bird lover when he makes a new
acquaintance in the feathered domain, no matter how many other
observers may have seen and studied the species.  "A bird that is new
to _me_ is to all intents and purposes a new bird," is his
self-complacent mode of reasoning, though it may not be distinguished
for its logic.

[Illustration: Chipping Sparrow]

After studying the birds in Ohio and Indiana for a good many years, I
moved to eastern Kansas, where I lived for five and a half years.  My
rambles were by no means confined to the wooded bluffs and hollows that
bound the Missouri River on the west, for I also made excursions out
upon the prairies of Kansas, over into the state of Missouri, and down
into Oklahoma; and everywhere I carried my field glass with me and kept
both eyes intent on the birds.  You would expect an enthusiast in the
pursuit of bird lore to do nothing else.  What a pleasure it was to
ramble about in new fields and make acquaintance with new bird friends!
There is not a very marked difference between the avifauna of eastern
Kansas and Ohio, and yet there are some birds found in the former state
that are not met with in the latter--enough to keep the observer on the
tiptoe of expectancy for several months.

One of my new acquaintances was a little bird which is known as the
clay-colored sparrow.  It belongs to the same genus (_Spizella_) as the
chipping and field sparrows which are so well known in the East; but it
has an individuality of its own, and is not merely a copy.  I stumbled
upon it while pursuing my explorations near Peabody, far out on the
level prairie, where the species was abundant during the season of
migration.  As I was sauntering along a road, a peculiar croaking
little trill greeted me from the hedge, sounding very much like the
rasping call of certain kinds of grasshoppers when they are suddenly
startled and take to wing.  But no insect had ever emitted quite such a
sound in my hearing.  This could not be an insect.  It was worth while
to look and make sure of the identity of the odd musician.

After some difficulty, I fixed my glass upon a number of little
sparrows about the size of the chippies.  They bore a close resemblance
to that species too, save that the crown-piece and the general tone of
the back were decidedly darker, while the under parts were a good deal
whiter.  The clear, ash-colored cervical interval between the crown and
the back and the distinct brown loral and auricular space told me
plainly who the little charmers were.  Not at the moment, however, for
the birds were new to me, and I had to wait until I could consult my
manual before I was able to decide that they were the clay-colored
sparrows.

Their song is an odd vocal performance--a low, croaking trill, preceded
by a few longer notes, all delivered in the same key.  It is, in fact,
a contralto solo divided into brief stanzas, and easily might be
mistaken for the grating buzz of an insect, especially if heard at a
distance of a few rods.  It possesses little or no musical quality, and
is perhaps the most curious style of bird minstrelsy with which I am
acquainted.  In comparison the chippie's trill sounds loud and clear
and bell-like, with a distinctly melodious quality of tone.  The song
of the little clay-colored sparrow is also marked by a kind of drawl,
giving one the impression that the bird is just a little too lazy to
exert himself; yet when you get him in the field of your glass and see
him throw back his head, expand his throat and chest, and open his
mandibles as wide as he can, you quickly decide that he is not the
apathetic creature his desultory song would lead you to infer.  It
really is laughable, and almost pathetic, too, to note how much energy
he expends in the production of his poor little aria.

Indeed, not in the least sluggish is the blood flowing in the veins of
_Spizella pallida_, for he is a vivacious little body, flitting about
actively in the hedges and bushes, and sometimes mounting into the
trees, chanting his little alto strain all the while, as if his life
depended upon it.  He is one of the comparatively few birds who is
lavish of his song in migration.

Unlike the familiar chippie, he does not usually find a perch in plain
sight, from which to rehearse his song, but keeps himself well hidden
in the bushes or trees, darting into a hiding place as soon as he
thinks himself discovered.  The shy little imp prefers to put a screen
of foliage or twigs between himself and the observer.  Might his motto
be, "Little birds should be heard and not seen"?  I had quite a time
making sure of him, but, as a pleasant compensation, when his identity
was once settled, I could not well have mistaken him for another
species, for he is a bird of real distinction.

My study of the clay-colored sparrows was restricted to their habits in
migration, at which time they move about in more or less compact little
flocks, gathering seeds and chanting their monotonous trills.  While I
first found these sparrows near Peabody, they were also fairly common,
a few days later, in northeastern Kansas, about a mile back from the
Missouri River, where their low alto strains formed a kind of gray
background for the high-pitched trills of the Harris sparrows and the
loud pipings of the cardinals.  Quaint as our little contralto's solos
are, they have a distinct fascination for me, and now that I no longer
live in the Sunflower state, I miss them sorely when the springtime
comes.

These sparrows do not, I believe, breed in Kansas, but are known to
establish their households in the northern part of Illinois, central
and northern Iowa, the Red River region in Minnesota, the country
drained by the upper Missouri River and its tributaries, Manitoba as
far north as the Saskatchewan River, and the plains and bases of the
foothills of eastern Colorado.  Their nests are built on the ground or
in low bushes, and from three to five eggs, of a greenish-blue tint,
flecked with cinnamon-brown, are deposited.  They spend the winters in
southern Texas and still farther south.  Only "accidentally," as the
word goes, are they known in the eastern part of the United States, and
for that reason little has yet been written about them in popular books
on birds.  The time will come, no doubt, when they will have a
well-recognized place in bird literature, just as the chippie, the
vesper sparrow, and the song sparrow have to-day.

In bird study it is never safe to take too much for granted.  One must
be constantly on the alert, and, more than that, one must be able to
make fine distinctions with both the ear and the eye.  Here is a case
in point.  For many days, while strolling about in quest of bird lore,
I heard a quaint little song in the bushy clumps, and that, too, in
some of the most out-of-the-way places.  "It is nothing but the house
wren," I muttered to myself, I know not how often.  "It isn't worth
while to look for it when there are new birds to be found.  Still, it's
singular," I continued, "that the house wren should dwell in such
secluded places.  It would seem that his name is a misnomer--at least,
in a good many instances." Several times I stopped to listen more
intently to the rolling ditty.  "There's something odd about that
wren's song," I repeated.  "Does the house wren always close its song
with the rising inflection, as if it were asking a question?"

Then I would perhaps make a half-hearted attempt to get a glimpse of
the lyrist, but it kept itself well hidden in the bushes, and I
desisted, begrudging the time taken from my quest for feathered
rarities.  But one day, while strolling along the banks of a small
stream, I again heard the labored ditty, and the next moment a small
bird darted into full view, calling and scolding in an agitated way,
and, while I watched it capering about, it broke into the very song to
which for several weeks I had been listening so carelessly.  Why, it
was not a wren after all!  It did not look like a wren, nor act like
one, but, rather, its form and conduct were like those of a vireo; and
a vireo it was.  My bird manual soon settled that point.  And what was
the name of the little stranger who had introduced himself in so
informal a way?  It was the Bell vireo, an entirely new species to me.

It is not an eastern species; it ranges from Illinois to the base of
the Rocky Mountains.  In Kansas it is a summer resident, hanging its
little basket of a nest on the twigs of bushes or low trees, after the
regular vireo fashion.  It was my good fortune to find a nest on a
copsy hilltop, where the bird's madrigals and lullabies mingled with
those of the yellow-breasted chats, the indigo buntings, the blue-gray
gnat catchers, and the Kentucky warblers.  To this day I feel a longing
to visit the secluded spot where I held so many pleasant interviews
with these birds.

Another Kansas bird that was new to my eyes and that afforded me much
delight was the Harris sparrow--a distinctively western species, not
known, or at least very rarely, east of the Mississippi River.  He is
truly a fine bird, a little larger than the fox sparrow, neatly clad,
his breast prettily decorated with a brooch of black spots held in
place by a slender necklace of the same color, while his throat and
forehead are bordered with black.  His rump and upper tail coverts are
a delicate shade of grayish brown, by which he may be readily
distinguished from the fox sparrow, whose rear parts are reddish brown.
His beak, feet, and legs are of a pinkish tint, making him look quite
trig and dressy.  The latest of the spring arrivals were the most
highly colored, having the whole chin, throat, and top of the head a
glossy, uniform black.

It would appear that the most matured individuals migrate farthest
south in winter.  That, at least, would be the natural conclusion,
judging from the fact that they arrive latest in the spring in our
central latitudes.  In the southern part of Kansas the Harris sparrows
are said to be common winter sojourners, but in the north-eastern part
of the state they disappeared in November or December, and did not
return until the middle of February, or later if the weather happened
to be severe.  From the time of their vernal arrival they were to be
seen in every ramble until they took flight for their breeding haunts
in the North.  One spring some of them were still loitering in Kansas
on the eleventh of May, and were singing blithely, no doubt waiting for
the winter cold of their summer homes to be well past before they
ventured farther toward the arctic lands.

In general, the habits of these birds are much like those of the
white-throated sparrows, which are much more common in the East than in
the West.  The Harris sparrows are fond of copses and hedges, and
especially of brush heaps in new grounds.  So marked, indeed, is their
penchant for brush heaps that I almost wish one might re-christen them
"brush-heap sparrows."  Many a time I have played a little trick on the
unsuspecting birds by stealing up to a brush pile and giving it a
sudden blow with my cane; then a whole covey of them would dash
pellmell from their covert with loud chirps of protest against such
wantonness.

Sometimes they are found in the depths of the woods, providing there is
thick underbrush in which they can conceal themselves.  I seldom found
them in open places either in the woods or fields.  Yet, shy as they
are, they have a fondness for the dense hedges along the highways,
flitting and chirping as the traveler passes by.

Being wary birds, they do not wander far from their hiding places, into
which they precipitate themselves at the approach of a supposed danger.
It was quite a while before I could get a clear view of their breasts,
for, with provoking persistence, they kept their tails turned toward
me.  However, when once you really become acquainted with a bird, it
seems to lose part of its shyness, and so after a time I often had the
Harris sparrows in plain view.  One of their characteristic habits was
to stand at full height on the top of a brush heap, with tail lifted,
crest feathers erect, and eyes wide open, the picture of wild
alertness.  In such poses they are indeed handsome birds.

It was March 5, 1898, when I heard the first song of this sparrow, and
even then it was only a fragment of a song.  But, the weather remaining
pleasant, the sixteenth of the month brought a fine concert.  The
bird's song was a surprise to me.  It began with a prolonged run so
much like the opening tremolo of the white-throated sparrow that it
might have led the most expert ornithologist astray.  The fact is, I
looked around for quite a while in search of a white-throat, thinking
him still a little out of tune, and therefore unable to finish his
chanson; and I was undeceived only by the singing of several Harris
sparrows that with unusual boldness had perched in plain sight.  The
resemblance ceased, however, with the opening notes, for the western
bird did not add the sweet, rhythmic triad of his white-throated
cousin, the closing part of his song being only a somewhat labored
trill of no distinct character, and not fulfilling the promise of his
initial strain.

In the concerts of these birds--and frequently many of them would be
trilling at the same time--they sang in several different keys, some of
them striking the treble and others dropping almost to the alto.
Occasionally two birds in different parts of a field would sing
responsively, one trill running very high in the scale, the other an
octave lower.  It seemed almost as if the responsive exercise was
engaged in intentionally.

The Harris sparrow has another song which is quite unlike his melodious
trill.  It is delivered in a loud voice of little musical quality, and
the notes are pounded out in a percussive style, like the explosion in
quick succession of a number of little cartridges.  Yet you must be
quite close to the bird in order to hear the queer canticle distinctly,
and when you do hear it you will wonder why nature ever put such a song
into a bird's larynx.  The Harris sparrow also utters an explosive
alarm-call, which expresses not a little petulance and concern.

One day a pretty picture was made by two of these birds that stood face
to face on a brush heap, bowing at each other, each threatening to peck
the other's head off, and both singing all the while at the top of
their voices, yet each afraid, in spite of his bluster, to close with
his opponent in actual contest.  It was a miniature exhibition of the
beak-to-beak challenging often indulged in by two rival cocks of the
farmyard.  For some minutes the little farce was kept up, then one of
the birds became tired of the game and darted over to the next brush
heap.

I have said that these birds are scarcely known east of the Mississippi
River, but Mr. Ridgway says that they are occasionally seen during
migration in Illinois and Wisconsin.  In eastern Kansas and western
Missouri they are common, almost abundant, during both the vernal and
autumnal migrations, and after you have once cultivated their
acquaintance they are likable, if not quite companionable, birds.  But
familiar as they are in the regions named, they are still something of
a mystery to the naturalists of our country, for Mr. Ridgway says that
their "breeding range is unknown," save that there is a doubtful record
of one nest at Fort Custer, Montana; while Mrs. Bailey says: "The
breeding range of the Harris sparrow is unknown except for Mr. Preble's
Fort Churchill record.  The last of July, among the dwarf spruces of
Fort Churchill, he found an adult male and female with young just from
the nest."  It will be remembered that Fort Churchill is away up on the
coast of the Hudson Bay.  It is probable, therefore, that the nest of
the Harris sparrow has never been found by any of the naturalists of
America.  Who would suppose that these birds, so numerous and so well
known in Kansas, would, in the breeding season, surround themselves
with such an air of mystery?

It was in Kansas, too, that I really came to know the Lincoln sparrow
and hear his song, although I had caught a few fleeting glimpses of him
in the East, and also in the neighborhood of Duluth, Minnesota.  In the
Sunflower state his conduct was just about as inconsistent as it could
have been without being downright absurd.  What do I mean by that?
Why, while he was as wild as a deer, he still came to town, flitting
about in the bushes of a vacant lot near my house, and even visiting
the fence between my yard and the adjoining one, hopping about on the
ground with one eye on the lookout for nits and worms and the other for
human disturbers.  My attention was first drawn to him by hearing a
squeaky little trill in the vacant lot.  But, my! how wary he was when
I went out to find him!  The song bore some resemblance to that of the
house wren, but had not so rolling and gurgling a quality, and was
pitched to a slightly higher and finer key.  For a long time he kept
himself ensconced in the thicket, trilling saucily at intervals, as if
daring me to find him if I could, and when I finally drove him out of
his hiding place, he darted off in a zigzag course to another bush
clump, into which he dropped in the greatest possible haste.

By and by his curiosity got the better of him, and he flitted to the
top of a brush heap and peeped out at me surreptitiously.  My glass was
upon him in a moment, revealing his whitish throat and mottled chest
washed with buff, the latter being his characteristic marking.  A few
days later he was singing in a small apple tree by my neighbor's fence.
I stole as close to him as I could and peered at him through my
binocular, while he returned the compliment by peering at me, and then
warily ventured to rehearse his little tune.  The least movement on my
part would startle him, cause him to flit to another perch and crane
out his neck to glare at me questioningly with wild, dilated eyes,
uncertain whether I was to be trusted or not.  Both of us presently
grew tired of our strained position, and so I walked off and he flew
away.  No doubt there was mutual satisfaction in the inspection we gave
each other; at least, I felt well satisfied with having heard the song
of so shy a bird.  His stay in my neighborhood lasted only a few days;
then he left as mysteriously as he had come, without even the courtesy
of a good-bye.  He went to his summer home in the North, and I did not
see him again until the next spring, just twelve months later almost to
the day.




WILDWOOD MINSTRELS*

* Parts of this and several other chapters of this book were first
published in The New York Times, whose courtesy in permitting him to
reprint, the author hereby acknowledges.


Nothing affords the bird student more pleasure than settling the identity
of species, albeit sometimes it is hard and patience-trying work.  And of
all the birds, none are so provokingly and charmingly elusive as some of
the wood warblers.  What a time I had for several years in making sure of
some of these little nymph-like creatures which were flitting about in
the foliage of the trees, concealing themselves by a leafy barrier!  Many
a weary chase did they lead me through the woods, and more than once I
almost unjointed my neck by long-continued looking up.

For identifying the tree-top flitters an opera glass is scarcely powerful
enough.  A field glass or a Bausch & Lomb binocular is really a
necessity.  It draws the bird right down to you, while at the same time
the elusive creature remains at what it regards a safe distance.  Its
conduct will therefore not be constrained, and the observer can study it
in its natural poses.

What an enigma the Tennessee warbler for a long time remained to me!
Never still for a moment, yet so indistinctly marked that at a distance
it looks like a dozen other birds one might name--a veritable feathered
rebus.  But finally I fixed its place in the avian schedule with the help
of my field glass--white under parts, slightly tinged with yellow, back
and rump olive green, top and sides of head delicate bluish-ash; no
eye-ring, no wing-bars.  There is no other warbler marked quite like
that.  And yet its song is its most conspicuous mark, so to speak, for it
is a loud, shrill, and very rapidly repeated run, which might be spelled
out in this way: "Chippy, chippy, chippy, chippity-chippity-chippity."
The whole song is emitted at a galloping pace, giving you the impression
that the bird is in a desperate hurry.  Important business on hand, no
doubt!  Yes, there is a worm or a nit on the under side of that leaf, and
he must nab it now or never!  With such pressing business matters on
hand, he has no time for regaling you with "linked sweetness long drawn
out."

Still, he sometimes does prolong his ditty, giving it a saucy,
challenging air.  No other warbler sings so loudly.  His voice is as
shrill and penetrating as that of the indigo bird, though the song is
quite different in technique.

[Illustration: Yellow Warbler]

Another feathered conundrum was the Nashville warbler, whose back and
head are colored like those of the Tennessee, but whose under parts are
bright yellow, instead of white or white only slightly washed with
yellow; and, besides, sharp peering through your glass will reveal a
distinct white ring encircling the eye.  The bird in the hand would also
show a dainty chestnut patch on the crown, but this mark is seldom seen
while it is flitting about in the leafy trees.  The songs of the
Nashville and the Tennessee are somewhat similar, but not the same, the
Tennessee's being louder, shriller, and more sharply accentuated, while
his cousin's is more liquid and musical and far less sibilant.  My notes
represent the Nashville's song phonetically as follows: "Swee, swee,
swee, ah-wit-ah-wit-ah-wit," delivered rapidly in a high key and with not
a little energy and emphasis.  When my notes were made the little lyrist
was putting his best foot forward, and was not high in the trees, so that
I heard him distinctly.  The Tennessee warblers were also singing near at
hand, giving me a good opportunity to compare the arias of the two
species.

Belonging to the same subfamily is the orange-crowned warbler.  It has
not so marked a preference for trees as its little relatives just
mentioned, but likes, so far as my observation goes, to flit about in
thickets, where it remains in hiding until driven from its covert or
drawn forth by curiosity.  Only for a moment does it appear in sight,
then plunges into another covert.  You will note that its eye-ring is
yellow, and that its under parts are neither bright yellow, like the
Nashville's, nor white, like the Tennessee's, but greenish yellow
obscurely streaked on the chest.  I have never heard the song of the
orange-crown.

There are a number of shy warblers that are especially partial to wild,
unfrequented parts of the woods, where they are seldom disturbed by human
intruders.  In Kansas I found them in the deep, densely wooded ravines
running back from the Missouri River and its tributary valleys.  Although
these feathered recluses are rarely molested by man, they seem to know
enough about his character to look upon him with a suspicious eye when he
ventures into their sylvan domain.  Hence they are hard to study, and it
is not often that their deftly hidden nests can be found.

One of the most delightful of these hermits is the Kentucky warbler.  A
brilliant little bird he is, with his golden under parts and superciliary
line, his black patch on the cheek just below the eye, his black cap, and
his coat of iridescent olive green.  You will not mistake him for the
Maryland yellow-throat, which also wears a black patch on the side of his
head; but this patch lies over the eye and includes it, and its upper
border is white, while this bird lacks the yellow and curved superciliary
band.  Besides, the yellow-throat is not a woodland but a marsh bird.
The Kentucky warbler is attractive in many ways.  An industrious
minstrel, his voice is strong and full for so small a bird, and until you
learn to know his tune well, you may mistake it for that of the cardinal.
But, as a piper, he lacks the versatility of the cardinal, who carries a
number of music sheets in his repertory, while the little Kentuckian
confines his lyrical efforts principally to one strain.  Sometimes he
delivers his intermittent aria from a low bush or even from the ground,
but his favorite song-perches are the branches of saplings and trees just
below the zone of foliage.  Here, in the shadows, you may be compelled to
look for him for some time before you espy his trig little form, and even
then you are likely to see him because he flits to another perch rather
than because you first catch the glint of his colors.  Whether he means
it or not, he is something of a ventriloquist, for which reason you will
often look for him in many places before seeing him.

As I have noted, he is an untiring singer.  It never occurred to me to
time him, but Dr. Frank M. Chapman has had the patience to do so.  "On
one occasion," says this observer, "at Englewood, New Jersey, I watched a
male for three hours.  During this period, with the exception of five
interruptions of less than forty-five seconds each, he sang with the
greatest regularity once every twelve seconds.  Thus, allowing for the
brief intervals of silence, he sang about 875 times, or some 5,250 notes.
I found him singing, and when I departed he showed no signs of ceasing."
It is such painstaking observations that add something new and fresh to
our knowledge of birds.

The Kentucky warbler is fond of walking about on the ground in the woods,
seeking for his favorite insects.  As you slowly follow, you will now and
then catch a glimpse of him through the apertures of the leaves; then he
will again disappear beneath his canvas of green.  Thus he pursues his
quest hour after hour, and you may hear the rustle of his tiny feet upon
the carpet of dead leaves.  Is it only a notion of mine, or am I correct,
in thinking that his promenades on the ground are mostly taken early in
the spring before there is danger from snakes?

I like the pretty Kentuckians, but must grant you that in some respects
they are quite exasperating, never inclined to be as confiding as some
other birds.  And then most birds will sooner or later betray the
presence of their nests, but the Kentucky warblers seldom do so, knowing
too well how to keep their procreant secrets.  They have evidently
learned the use of strategy, as you will see: One day a pair began to
chirp vigorously as I approached their demesne in a lonely hollow, and I
felt a thrill of joy at the prospect of finding a nest.  One of them even
flitted about with a worm in its bill--a sure sign of nestlings in the
neighborhood.  For nearly four hours I watched the chirping couple, and
peered, as I thought, into every nook and cranny of the place, but all in
vain; neither nest nor bantlings could I find.  Yet in some way that
seemed almost mysterious enough to be uncanny, the mother bird got rid of
the tidbit which she held in her bill.  She probably decided to eat it
herself rather than betray the whereabouts of her younglings.  I have
seen more than one parent bird do that.

A few days later, in the same hollow, a Kentucky warbler was singing
contentedly, showing no signs of uneasiness.  The female was not to be
seen or heard.  I stalked about a long time, hoping to flush her from her
nest, but all my efforts were as futile that day as they had been on my
previous visit.  In another hollow, on the same day, I watched a Kentucky
warbler flitting about with a worm in her bill.  Again and again she
disappeared somewhere in the tanglewood, and came back with an empty bill
to chirp her disapproval of my spying; but look as I would in the very
places where she went down, I could discover no nest.  In Warbledom it is
evidently no violation of ethical principles to act a lie in order to
protect a nestful of bantlings.

But my story is not to have a disappointing ending, after all, for in the
spring and summer of 1902 my stars became auspicious, and I found three
Kentucky warblers' nests that were tenanted and several more that were
already deserted.  Perhaps the turning of my luck was due not so much to
accident as to the fact that I had "caught on," and knew more about their
ruses.  One of the nests discovered is worth describing.

It was on a hilltop in Kansas, blown by the freshest breezes that sweep
over the limitless prairies.  An ideal spot, indeed, for the nesting of
birds that love lone places.  In one of my rambles I found this pleasant
elevation, and was attracted by the possibilities it offered for bird
study.  Presently a male Kentucky warbler appeared with a couple of large
worms in his beak, and I made up my mind to find his nest if perseverance
could accomplish that object.  So I sat down in the shade of a tree and
watched the bird closely.  Now note his admirable finesse.  After
flitting about among the bushes for a minute or two, chirping his protest
at my presence, he descended into the copse below and disappeared.  Of
course, any student of birds would have supposed that he had gone down
near the nest to feed his bairns, and that he only needed to go and
examine the place to discover the little avian secret.  My pulses
thrilled more than a little as I began my search for the nest right where
the bird had descended into the thicket.  But do you know that my most
strenuous efforts--and they _were_ strenuous on a hot day like
that--resulted only in disappointment?  The nest was not to be found
within a radius of a rod from the point where the little diplomat went
down.  A few days later I made my way to the hilltop, and do you know
that the shrewd bird played me the same trick?  He scuttled down into the
bushes at almost the same point as before, and no nest rewarded my
search.  I went home just about ready to give up my search for Kentucky
warblers' nests, for I had been hunting them for a number of years
without success.

However, in a few days I found my way again to the breezy hilltop.  The
chats, vireos, and indigo birds gave due warning of my approach, and I
felt sure that Master Kentucky and his mate would be on their guard.  To
my delight, in a few minutes the female presented herself in one of the
trees, her bill holding a bunch of worms.  Luckily she was not so wary or
diplomatic as her husband, and, in addition, she extremely anxious to
feed her hungry babies.  Instead of going over to the copse where the
male bird had played me such a clever trick, she flew down the path about
four rods to a small scrub oak, from which she soon dropped into the
weeds below.  Then I said to myself; "Aha!" and smiled in a knowing way.

I walked down the path to the tree, but no Kentucky warblers were to be
seen--not right away.  So I sat down in the path and waited to see what
would happen.  It was only a short time till the female appeared, with a
telltale bunch of worms in her beak.  A moment later her mate also
arrived, carrying a small worm in the usual way.  The situation was
growing interesting.  The two birdlets chirped and flitted about in the
tree for a long time, afraid to go down to the nest.  I moved slowly and
cautiously farther up the path to give them a better chance to divulge
their secret.  Presently the pretty madame summoned courage to drop to a
lower perch in the tree, then to a still lower one, then to the top of
one of the bushes below, and at last into the weed clump and out of sight.

I wasted no time.  In a minute I was pressing the weeds apart and looking
down admiringly into the little cot with its four half-fledged
occupants--the first Kentucky warbler's nest I had ever seen.  Set upon
the ground, its bulky foundation of dry leaves supported the cup proper,
which was lined with fine grass.  Easy enough to find when you knew
precisely where to look for it.

Think now of the little game the male bird had played me on my previous
visits to the haunt!  He had descended into the copse about four rods
distant from the nest instead of going down near its site; then he had
doubtless followed a secret pathway through the weeds and bushes to the
nest, fed his children, and hurried away without letting himself be seen.

The parent birds did not like the idea of my finding and inspecting their
nest, for they chirped and darted about in a panic.  To relieve their
anguish I retired up the slope a short distance, seated myself in the
pleasant shade of a scrub oak, and made an entry of my find in my
notebook.  Alas!  I had probably done harm to my little friends without
intending it, for their chirping attracted the attention of one of their
worst foes, and drew him to the spot.  I loitered about for perhaps ten
minutes, and then decided to take one more peep at the pretty domicile
before leaving the hilltop.  As I drew near, I observed that the parent
birds were chirping in a low, but heart-broken way, as if they were
almost stricken dumb with terror.  Were they so badly frightened because
I was returning to their nest?

I stepped up cautiously and looked down at the nest.  It was now my turn
to give vent to a cry of consternation, for what I saw was this: A large
blacksnake coiled about the nest, the fold of his neck wabbling to and
fro in a terrifying way, while with his mouth he was trying to seize one
of the bantlings.  Fortunately I had a good-sized stick, almost a club,
in my hand, and I wasted no time in bringing it down with all the force I
could command upon the serpent, taking care to deliver the blow at the
side of the nest.  The snake tried to uncoil, but another blow broke his
backbone, if indeed the first one had not done so, and he was in my
power.  He had swallowed one of the nestlings, but three were left, and
seemed to be in good condition.  On my return to the place a few days
later the nest was empty, and I fear that the remaining little ones had
also been destroyed, perhaps by the mate of the snake from which I had
rescued them.

On the shelf of a steep bluff covered with a riot of bushes and briars a
pair of hooded warblers found a dwelling place to their taste in the
spring of 1900.  This handsome birdlet may be known by his dainty yellow
hood, bordered with black, and cannot be mistaken for any other member of
the great feathered fraternity.  One cannot look at him without feeling
that Nature tried to see what she could do in the way of an unusual
arrangement of colors.  Who can tell what impelled her to make a living
gem like this, as odd as it is beautiful?

On the side of the bluff referred to I was first attracted by the
vivacious song of the little male, which I had not heard for several
years--not since an excursion I had taken into Louisiana and Mississippi.
His voice was clear and ringing, and the tune he executed was by no means
a meager performance.

One day a loud, metallic chirping was heard, and presently two hooded
warblers appeared, each with the proverbial green worm in its beak.  I
decided to remain in the nook and watch, for the nesting habits of these
rare warblers were new to me.  In and out, up and down, here and there,
they flitted, making a checker-work of black and gold amid the foliage,
craning their necks, peering at me with anxious inquiry in their dark
little eyes, and filling the woodland with their uneasy chirping.

It was a long time to wait, but at length patience had its reward; one of
the birds flew down to the bushes on the steep slope above me and fed a
youngster in plain view.  No time was lost in pushing through the bushy
tangle to the magic spot.  Behold! it was a young cowbird that had been
fed by the devoted little mother!  That was trying beyond expression--to
think that all the efforts of the pretty couple, all their intense
solicitude, was wasted on a great, hulking impostor like the cowbird.  He
had just scrambled from the nest, from which he had doubtless previously
crowded the rightful heirs of the family to perish from starvation on the
ground.  I found the nest only about a foot away from the perch of the
young bird--a deep, neat little basket, compactly felted with down and
plant fibers, set in the crotch of a slender bush of the thicket.  It was
certainly too small to accommodate any tenants besides the strapping
young cowbird.  In the spring of 1902 another hooded warbler's nest
rewarded my search.  Its holdings were four callow bantlings, all of
which were carried off by some marauder before my next visit.

Another little charmer of the woodland, especially of thick second-growth
timber, is the blue-winged warbler, which glories in the high-sounding
Latin name of _Helminthophila pinus_.  Wherever seen, he would attract
attention on account of the peculiar cut and color of his clothes.  A
conspicuous black line reaching from the corner of the mouth back through
the eye is a diagnostic feature of his plumage, while his crown and
breast gleam in bright yellow, almost golden in the sunshine; his wings
and tail are blue-gray, with some white trimmings, and his back and rump
are bright olive  There you have an array of colors that makes a picture
indeed.  Madame Blue-wing wears the same pattern as her lord, but the
hues are less brilliant.

The manners of Sir Blue-wing--I call him so because of his distinguished
air--are interesting, for they differ, in one respect at least, from
those of most of the other warblers of my acquaintance.  He flits about
among the branches in rather a leisurely way--for a warbler; but his main
characteristic is his unwarbler-like fashion of clinging back downward to
the under side of the twigs, after the manner of the chickadee, in order
to secure the nits and worms under the leaves.  He acts decidedly like a
diminutive trapeze performer.

His song consists of an insect-like buzz, divided into stanzas of two
syllables each, with a pensive strain running through it, as if the heart
of the little singer were filled with sadness.  While it sounds rather
faint at a distance, close at hand it has a strangely penetrating quality.

Although my numerous efforts to find a blue-wing's nest were unavailing,
I had the satisfaction of proving beyond doubt that these birds breed in
northeastern Kansas.  A quaint, squeaking call attracted my attention one
day, and I found that it proceeded from the throat of a young blue-wing
perched in the bushes, for presently the mamma came and thrust a morsel
into the open mouth of the bantling.  Some young birds sit quietly and
patiently, waiting for their rations, and utter only a faint twitter when
they are fed; but the youthful blue-wings are not of so contented and
silent a disposition.  On the contrary, they are noisy little fellows,
making their presence known to friend and foe alike, although they are
very careful never to permit the human observer to come too close.  They
are duly warned of danger by their ever-vigilant parents.  Sometimes a
youngster will sit on the same perch for a long time, preening his
feathers and uttering a little call at intervals, just to keep in
practice, as it were; while at other times he will pursue his parents
about in the woods, loudly demanding his dinner.  One season I succeeded
in finding at least five pairs of these warblers, in company with their
clamorous broods.  The nest is set on the ground in the bushes and grass
of second-growth timber tracts.  Lined with tendrils and fine strips of
bark, it is "firmly wrapped with numerous leaves, whose stems point
upward."  Another haunter of the dusky depths of the woods is the
ovenbird.  His song is one of the most peculiar in warblerdom.  Beginning
in moderate tones, it grows louder and louder as it nears the end, and
really seems like a voice moving toward you.  This bird also walks about
in the woods, and does not hop, as most of his relatives do.  As he walks
about on his leafy carpet, his head erect, he has quite a consequential
air.  He derives his name from the fact that his nest, set on the ground,
is globular in form, with the entrance at one side, giving it the
appearance of a small oven.

The gay redstarts, which seem to be so tame and confiding in the early
spring, turn into veritable eremites in the breeding season, seeking the
most secluded portions of the woods as their habitat.  Their little nests
are harder to find than one would suppose; yet I have had the good
fortune to watch two females erecting the walls of their tiny cottages,
and a pretty sight it was.

The redstart has some interesting ways.  One of them is his habit of
spreading out his wings and tail as he perches or flits about in the
trees, as if he were anxious to display the fiery trimmings that so
elegantly set off his little black suit.  Blood will tell, for I have
seen the young redstarts imitating their parents by spreading out their
odd, croppy tails in a comical way.

[Illustration: Chickadee]

How early in life young birds are taught some of the lessons that are
needful for their own safety!  One day I heard a young redstart chirping
for his dinner.  I quietly thrust my head into the thicket, and soon
espied the birdkin perched on a twig only about a rod away.  He either
did not see me, or else decided that I was not a bugaboo.  A few minutes
later the mother darted into the enclosure and fed her baby.  She was too
much absorbed in her duties to notice me until the repast was over; then
she suddenly caught sight of her unwelcome caller.  She stood transfixed
with astonishment for one breathless moment, then uttered a piercing cry
of alarm that sent the little one dashing away like a streak of
lightning.  Plainly the youngster understood his mamma's signal, for
until she uttered it he had sat perfectly quiet and unconcerned, perhaps
not even aware of my presence.  Birds are taught the language of fear at
a tender age.  Of course they learn it so readily because there is a
basis of timidity in their natures, implanted by heredity.




CHICKADEE WAYS*

*Reprinted by permission, from "Our Animal Friends," New York.


In a somewhat casual way, and without going into their natural history,
the last two chapters have indicated the method of making an
acquaintance with new species and of studying the habits of a few wild
birds.  A few chapters will now be devoted to a fuller study of a
number of interesting birds.  Not that I expect to write their complete
life histories, which, indeed, would not be necessary; but that I may
give you some idea of the large amount of knowledge that can be gained
of one species.  If this were multiplied by the knowledge procurable
from the study of all the members of the feathered brotherhood, think
what an education the whole would give one.  Let us begin with the
familiar little tomtit.

In his valuable manual, "Birds of Eastern North America," Dr. Frank M.
Chapman calls the little black-capped chickadee an "animated bunch of
black and white feathers."  That is certainly a graphic and correct way
of putting it, for no bird is more active and alert than this little
major with the black skull cap and ashy-blue coat.  Everybody knows
him, I take it, but if any more points are needed for his
identification, you must look for a little bird which, in addition to
his cap of glossy black, wears a bib of the same color, buckled up
close to his chin, with a wedge of white inserted on each side of his
neck between the black of his throat and crown to the corner of his
mouth.

If all birds were as sociably disposed as the little tomtit--for that
is also one of his names--bird study would be a delight, and almost a
sinecure.  Trustful and fearless, he often comes within a few feet of
you, and fixes you with his keen little eyes, which dart out
innumerable interrogation points.  Sometimes he calls his own name in a
saucy way, "Chick-a-dee-dee, chick-a-dee-dee," which, being
interpreted, means, "What is your business here, sir?  Aren't you out
of your proper latitude?"  Occasionally he will grow terribly excited
over your presence--or at least pretend to--scolding and shaming you
until you feel yourself a real interloper; at other times he will
salute you in the most affable way, as if bidding you welcome to his
haunts and inviting you to come often and make yourself at home.  What
a pity it is he cannot talk, and let us know what he really thinks of
us and of the world in general!  Dr. Chapman says that on two occasions
chickadees have flown down and perched on his hand, giving him the
feeling that he was being taken into their confidence.

Watch Master Tomtit as he performs some of his acrobatic feats, putting
the tilters and tumblers in the human circus to the blush.  He often
hangs back downward from a slender twig or even a leaf, and daintily
picks the nits that have ensconced themselves in the buds or foliage.
Let his flexile perch sway in the wind as it will, he is safe, for if
the twig should break or his hold should slip, which seldom occurs, he
can recover himself at once by spreading his nimble wings, wheeling
about, and alighting on a perch below.  Ah, yes! the tomtit is the
embodiment and poetry of nimbleness.

But he is more than a mere feathered gentleman; he is an extremely
useful citizen.  Prof. E. D. Sanderson published a valuable article in
"The Auk" for April 1898, in which he proved that this bird serves a
most useful purpose as an insecticide.  He examined the craws of
twenty-eight chickadees, nineteen of them secured in the winter and
nine in the spring.  During the winter 70.7 per cent of the food found
in these stomachs was animal, while in the spring no vegetable matter
was found at all, the birds subsisting entirely on insects and their
eggs and larvae.  By far the larger part of the insects thus destroyed
were of the noxious species that bore into the bark and wood of the
trees or sting the fruit.  An orchard in which several chickadees had
taken up their abode one winter and spring was so well cleared of
canker worms that an excellent yield of fruit was grown, whereas the
trees of other orchards in the neighborhood were largely defoliated by
the destructive worms, and there was no yield of fruit.

Professor Sanderson made an interesting estimate of the economic value
of our little scavengers.  In the state of Michigan, where his
observations were made, he thinks that a fair average is seven
chickadees to the square mile.  If each bird should destroy fifty-five
insects per day, which is a very modest estimate, the seven birds would
consume three hundred and eighty-five every day, making about 137,500
per year in each square mile.  In this way about eight billions of
insects would be destroyed annually in the state--an economic fact
whose importance cannot be overestimated.

The same investigator also thinks that it would be wise for farmers and
fruit-growers to encourage the chickadees to make their homes in
orchards, and this could be done, he says, "by placing food for them
till they feel at home, by erecting suitable nesting sites, and by
careful protection"; to which I would add, by leaving a few old snags
in the trees where the birds can find natural nesting places.  Besides
the useful purpose the birds would serve, what pleasant companions they
would be, piping, both summer and winter, their sweet minor tunes!

No one can deny that the tomtit is a companionable little fellow.  In
addition to his vigorous call of "Chick-a-dee-dee," he whistles, as has
been said, a sweet minor strain which may be represented by the
syllables, "Phe-e-be-e," repeated again and again.  Often in midwinter,
when bland days come, and even in very cold weather, too, sometimes, he
will pipe his pensive air, which floats through the woods like a song
of chastened sadness.

Not infrequently two tits will engage in what may be called a
"responsive exercise," swinging their two-part song back and forth in
the woods like a silvery pendulum.  Not soon shall I forget a winter
day on which I listened with delight to such an antiphonal duet.  I was
standing in a road that wound along the foot of a steep, wooded bluff,
and the two minstrels were in the woods above me, one of them singing
very high in the scale, the other responding in the same tune, but
almost, if not quite, an octave lower.  At first they were about twenty
rods apart, but as they swung back and forth, they gradually approached
each other until the distance between them was only a few feet.  The
music seemed like a slender thread of silver which was being wound up
at both ends, gradually drawing the little fluters together.  Sometimes
one of them would miss one note of his dissyllabic song, and at times
the refrains were repeated in a leisurely way, at times in quick
succession; but the performers never sang simultaneously, each waiting
until his fellow minstrel had given his reply.  The pleasing duet
lasted for many minutes; indeed, it was kept up long after I left the
immediate neighborhood, for when I had gone quite a distance the sweet
cadenzas still fell rhythmically on my ear.  To my mind the two-part
aria seemed like a voluntary performance, and I cannot doubt that it
was.  There was too much of an air of purpose about it to permit of the
thought that it was a mere accident or coincidence; but whether it was
a musical contest between rival vocalists, or the love song of a tomtit
and his mate, I could not determine.

Cunning in other ways, it would be strange if the tomtits did not
display acuteness in the selection of nesting sites.  A cosy hollow in
a dead snag or stump is especially acceptable.  Sometimes it is a
deserted woodpecker's cavity made trig and clean, while quite often,
when the wood is soft enough, the tits themselves chisel out a little
hole in a tree or stump or fence post.  I recall having once watched a
pair of chickadees hollowing the upper end of a truncated sassafras
tree that was half decayed.  They would fly into the cavity, pick off a
chip, dash out and away a rod or two, drop the fragment, then dart back
to the hollow for another piece.  In this way the busy couple worked
hour by hour without resting for an instant.  Their reason no doubt for
carrying the chips some distance away from their nest was that they did
not want any telltale fragments to betray their secret to their enemies.

It would be impossible to tell how many chickadee nests I have found in
all the years of my bird study.  One of them was in an old stump near a
path along which I was sauntering.  My attention was attracted by the
little husband's flying from the stump and calling nervously, thus
unwittingly "giving away" his secret.  Had he been quiet, my suspicions
would not have been aroused; but many birds, like a few people here and
there, find it very hard to keep a secret.  And this, by the way, is
one of the strangest things about Nature--that she has not taught her
feathered children to go with apparent unconcern about their employment
when a nest is near, but impels them to chirp and flit about in such a
way as to excite the suspicion of an enemy.

Moralizing aside, however.  On examining the stump, I found a deep
cavity just inside of the decaying bark.  Though it was quite dusk
within, by slightly pressing the bark aside I could see the little
mother sitting on the nest, unwilling to leave it in spite of my
proximity.  I almost touched her with my hand, and still she did not
move.  Unwilling to disturb so brave a heroine, I stepped back and
walked quietly away a few rods to see what would happen, when she
popped out of the orifice like an arrow and, joined by her mate, set up
a loud chattering, which sounded as if they were saying that I was the
nosiest and most impudent man in the whole countryside.

No doubt they were right, for I went back, in spite of their protest,
and peeped into the nest, and found four gleaming white eggs studding
the bottom like pearls.  Alas! when I visited the place two weeks
later, the little domicile had been raided, the half-decayed walls
having been broken down.  A tuft of gray hair hanging to a splinter
proved the invader to have been a predatory animal of some kind,
probably a cat.  The birds were nowhere to be seen--unless a pair
chirping in the woods on the other side of the valley were the same
couple, trying to rear a family in a safer place.

What a persistent sitter the female blackcap is!  One day I discovered
a nest in a fence post by the wayside.  Pressing the bark aside, I
could plainly see the little owner snuggling close to the bottom of the
cup.  I thrust my finger through the aperture and gently stroked her
head and back.  Still she hugged the nest, pressing her head close to
the grassy bottom, as if she thought she would be safe if her head were
hidden.  Thinking she must have little ones, or she would not cling so
tenaciously to the nest, I pushed my finger under her and partly raised
her from her seat.  Even this rude treatment she bore for a few
moments--but it was going too far even for her courageous little heart;
she lifted her head, glanced wildly at me for an intense moment, then
sprang from the cavity with a piercing cry.

Imagine my surprise to find the nest entirely empty, not even an egg
having yet been deposited.  The brave little lady had doubtless just
entered the nest to lay her first egg, and was not going to be driven
off without knowing the reason why.  The tomtit is game every time.

The entrance to most of the chickadee's nests is lateral, but I found
one nest whose doorway was in the top of a fence post, so that the
owners had to go down into it vertically.  The hole was quite deep, and
the birds would drop down into it as you have seen swifts dropping into
a chimney, but whether they went down head first or tail first I could
not learn, their movements were so quick.  Another feature of this nest
was that it had no roof, for the doorway was open to the sky, so that a
cloudburst would have filled up their little nursery and drowned its
inmates.




THE NUTHATCH FAMILY*

*This chapter is reprinted from that excellent bird magazine called
"American Ornithology," published by Charles K. Reed, Worcester, Mass.,
and edited by his son, Chester A. Reed.  The author is under obligation
to these gentlemen for their courtesy in permitting him to reprint the
article.


BIRDS OF THE INVERTED POSITION

There are a number of climbers in the bird realm, but none are quite so
expert as the nuthatch, which may be regarded as a past-master in the
art of clambering.  The woodpeckers amble up the boles and branches of
trees, and when they wish to descend, as they do occasionally for a
short distance, they hitch down backward.   The brown creepers ascend
their vertical or oblique walls in the same way, but seldom, if ever,
do anything else than clamber upward, never descending head downward
after the fashion of the nuthatches.

[Illustration: Nuthatch]

A little bird that comes very near disputing the palm with the nuthatch
as a sylvan coaster is the creeping warbler, which flits about over the
tree boles in all kinds of attitudes, even with his dainty head pointed
toward the earth.  No fear in his little striped breast of the blood
rushing to his brain.  However, even this clever birdlet's dexterity is
not equal to that of the nuthatch, for the latter is able to climb up
and down a smoother wall than his little rival.  More than that, the
nuthatch glides downward with more ease and in a straight line, and
does not fling himself from side to side as the warbler does.  Indeed,
the warbler's favorite method of going about is with his head directed
toward the sky rather than the reverse, while it really seems that the
nuthatch's predilection is to scuttle about in an inverted position.
Does he wish to chisel a grub out of the bark of a tree?  He usually
stands above the target at which he aims, so that he can deliver his
blows with more force, just as the human woodchopper prefers to take
his position above and not below the stick or log upon which he expects
to operate.  There the bird clings to his shaggy wall, pounding away
with might and main, until you fear he will shatter his beak or strew
his brains on the bark.  Sometimes, too, he thrusts his long, slender
beak into a crevice and pries with it in a way that threatens to snap
it off in the middle.

What has been said applies to the white-breasted nuthatch (_Sitta
carolinensis_), but it is fair to assume that all the other members of
this subfamily behave in the same way.  The woodpeckers and creepers
use their spiny tails as supports while stationary or in motion; not so
the nuthatches, which are sufficiently nimble on their feet to stand or
glide without converting their tails into braces.  Odd as it may seem
to the uninformed, the nuthatches belong to the order of passeres or
perching birds, in spite of their creeping habits.  The systematists
have placed them in this niche of the avicular scheme, not only because
they are able to perch like other passeres on twigs and small branches,
but also because they have the foot of the true perching bird, with
three toes in front and one, well developed, in the rear.  In this
respect they differ again from the woodpeckers, which have either two
fore and two hind toes, or two in front and only one behind.  This will
appear all the more remarkable when it is remembered that the _Picidae_
do not descend head downward at all, while the _Sittinae_ are the
head-downward goers par excellence.  Yet they have only one rear toe to
support them in their inverted position.  You would naturally suppose
that if any bird had need of two hind toes, it would be the nuthatch;
but the result proves that, after all, Nature had her wits about her
when she evolved this avian family.

The world over, there are twenty distinct species of nuthatches known
to scientific observers, but only four of them are natives of America.
Of course, there are a number of subspecies or varieties.  All of them
are incessant climbers and foragers, peering into crannies, pounding
here and there to make the grubs stir in their hiding places, jabbing
and prying with their beaks, and chiseling out all kinds of larvae,
grubs, and borers that would, if permitted to live and multiply, soon
devastate the timber and fruit trees and make this world a desert
indeed.  True, the other feathered clamberers and carpenters are fully
as useful, but depend upon it, the nuthatches do their share in
preserving our forests and orchards.

The white-breasted nuthatch is our most common species east of the
great plains, breeding from the Gulf States to the northern border of
the United States and to New Brunswick.  One peculiarity about him is
that he breeds throughout his range, and therefore may be found as both
a summer and winter resident in all suitable localities within these
boundaries.  In the winter, no matter how old Boreas may bluster, he is
one of the most cheerful denizens of the woods in our central
latitudes, calling his nasal "yank, yank, yank," and sometimes
indulging in a loud, half-merry outburst that goes echoing through the
woodlands.  No sound of the sylvan solitudes has a more woodsy flavor
or is more suggestive of vernal cheer and good will.  Sometimes he
chatters to his human visitors in the most cordial tones as he glides
up and down his arboreal promenade, or holds himself almost straight
out.

A hole in a stump or tree makes Madame Nuthatch a cosy nursery, which
she lines with feathers and leaves, making it soft and snug for her
downy brood.  Here they are safe from most of the prowlers that find
the more exposed nests of many other birds.  She deposits five to eight
eggs of a white or creamy-white ground-color, speckled with rufous and
lavender.  During the season of incubation and brood rearing the
nuthatches retire to the depth of the woods, and are quiet, secretive,
and unsocial, seldom betraying their procreant secrets.

These birds have another habit that is worth mentioning.  Having found
a larger supply of food than they require for their immediate use, they
carry morsels away and jam them into all sorts of holes and crannies in
the bark of the trees.  I have watched a pair for an hour diligently
laying by a store of sunflower seeds, which they had found at the edge
of the woods.  They do not store a quantity of provision in one place
like the squirrels, but deposit a tidbit here and there, wedging it
tightly into a crevice by hammering it with their stout bills.  Of
course, the woodpeckers and tomtits secure many of these half-hidden
goodies, but Master Nuthatch does not mind that, for he evens up the
theft by appropriating their stores when he finds them.

The white-breasted nuthatch may be known by his flat body and broad
shoulders, his bluish gray coat, black cap and mantle (all in one
piece), white cravat, shirt bosom and vest, with a few rufous
decorations on the belly and under tail-coverts.  The following
quotations from Wilson are given as much for their vivacious manner as
for the story itself:

"The male is extremely attentive to the female while sitting, supplying
her regularly with sustenance, stopping frequently at the mouth of the
hole, calling and offering her what he has brought, in the most
endearing manner.  Sometimes he seems to stop merely to inquire how she
is, and to lighten the tedious moments with his soothing chatter.  He
seldom rambles far from the spot, and when danger appears, regardless
of his own safety, he flies instantly to alarm her.  When both are
feeding on the trunk of the same tree, or of adjoining trees, he is
perpetually calling on her; and, from the momentary pause he makes, it
is plain he feels pleased to hear her reply.

"He rests and roosts with his head downwards; and appears to possess a
degree of curiosity not common in many birds; frequently descending,
very silently, within a few feet of the root of the tree where you
happen to stand, stopping, head downward, stretching out his neck in a
horizontal direction, as if to reconnoiter your appearance, and after
several minutes of silent observation, wheeling around, he again
mounts, with fresh activity, piping his unisons as before...  Sometimes
the rain, freezing as it falls, encloses every twig, and even the trunk
of the tree, in a hard, transparent coat or shell of ice.  On these
occasions I have observed his anxiety and dissatisfaction at being with
difficulty able to make his way along the smooth surface; at these
times he generally abandons the trees, gleans about the stables, around
the house, mixing among the fowls, entering the barn, and examining the
beams and rafters, and every place where he may pick up a subsistence."

Our charming white-breast has a little cousin called the red-breasted
nuthatch (_Sitta canadensis_), whose under parts are rufous or reddish
buff instead of white.  His crown and nape are black, then a white band
runs back from the base of the upper mandible to the hind neck, and
below this a black stripe reaches back in a parallel direction and
encloses the eye.  His upper parts, save those mentioned, are bluish
gray.  He is considerably smaller than the white-breast, and his range
is more northerly in summer; but, unlike his cousin, he does not breed
throughout his range; only in the localities which he selects for his
summer home.  Hence he is a migrant, dwelling in winter in the southern
states, and in summer in the latitude of Manitoba and Maine and
northward, and also on the summits of the mountains as far south as
Virginia.  It will be seen that the breeding precincts of the two
species overlap, while in winter _canadensis_ comes down from the north
and takes up his abode in the southern part of the demesne of
_carolinensis_.

While the white-breast is partial to oak, beech, maple, and other
deciduous forests, his little relative prefers a woodland of pine,
being very fond of scampering about on the cones, clinging to them with
his strong claws, and extracting the seeds with his stout little bill.
His call, though much like the "yank" of the white-breast, is pitched
to a higher key, and has even a more pronounced nasal intonation,
sounding as if he had taken a severe cold.  Besides, he gives
expression to some cheery notes that seem to be reserved for his own
family or exclusive social circles.  I found these pretty nuthatches in
the pine woods on Mackinac Island in midsummer, and have good reason to
believe that they breed there.

Cavities in trees or stumps furnish the redbreasts with nesting places
suited to their taste; but they have a cunning way of plastering the
entrance above and below with pine pitch, so as to make it just large
enough to admit their tiny bodies and yet too small to let in their
enemies.  In this respect they steal the laurels from their
white-breasted kinsmen, who seem to have no means by which to lessen
the dimensions of their natural doorways.

A still smaller member of this group is the brown-headed nuthatch
(_Sitta pusilla_), a resident of the South Atlantic and Gulf states, at
rare intervals wandering "accidentally" as far north as Missouri and
New York.  A daintily dressed little fellow is this bird, the top and
back of his head a dark grayish brown with a whitish patch on the nape,
the remainder of his upper parts being bluish gray and his under parts
grayish white.  His favorite dwelling places are in the pine woods of
the south, where he is on the most cordial terms socially with the pine
warbler and the red-cockaded woodpecker.  A most active little body, he
scampers from the roots of the trees to the terminal twigs at the top,
inspecting every cone, cranny and knot hole, chirping his fine,
high-keyed notes, sometimes in a querulous tone, and again in the most
cheerful and good-natured temper imaginable, now gliding up a tree
trunk, now scudding down head foremost, anon circling in a spiral
course.

One autumn I found a number of these nuthatches associated with a flock
of myrtle warblers on the most sociable terms in a pine woodland not
far from Pensacola, Florida.  Now they were up in the trees, now down
on the ground.  All the while they were chirping in their most genial
tones.  In a spring jaunt to southern Mississippi, I was fortunate
enough to find a nest in a half-decayed snag.  It contained four of the
prettiest half-fledged bird babies that have ever greeted my sight.

Oddly enough, our tiny clamberers utter a loud, shrill alarm-call that
bears close resemblance to the querulous protest of the sparrow hawk as
you approach her nest or young.  Doctor Chapman says of the brown
heads: "They are talkative sprites, and, like a group of school
children, each one chatters away without paying the slightest attention
to what his companions are saying."

The fourth member of the _Sittinae_ subfamily in America is the pigmy
nuthatch, known scientifically as _Sitta pygmaea_, a genuine westerner,
not known east of the plains.  However, in the Rocky Mountain district
he is an abundant species, his range east and west being from the
plains to the Pacific coast, and north and south from the Canadian
boundary to the mountains of Mexico.  Swinging and gliding about among
the pines, performing the same antics as his eastern kinsmen, he utters
a cheery whistle, that may be translated, "Whit, whit, whit."  His
movements are often so rapid that he is difficult to follow with the
eye as he flits from one tree to another or dashes amid the branches.
He scarcely remains quiet long enough for you to note his markings and
settle his identity, but once you are sure of him, you will never
mistake him for another bird.

In Colorado there is little of a migratory movement even up and down
the mountains among these interesting birdlets.  In the winter a few
descend from the heights and dwell on the plains, where the weather is
not so rigorous.  On the approach of spring they again hie up into the
mountains, spending the summer there and rearing their pretty bairns.
However, the majority of them remain in the mountains all winter,
braving the bitterest and fiercest storms, often at an altitude of
8,000 feet.  Their breeding range is from 6,000 to 10,000 feet, the
latter elevation being only a little below the timber line.

In spite of his unique and interesting habits, the poets have scarcely
begun to chant the praises of the American nuthatch.  One of the best
tributes I have been able to find is from the pen of Edith Thomas, who
apostrophizes our bird in this way:

  "Shrewd little haunter of woods all gray,
  Whom I meet on my walk of a winter day,
  You're busy inspecting each cranny and hole
  In the ragged bark of yon hickory bole;
  You intent on your task, and I on the law
  Of your wonderful head and gymnastic claw!

  "The woodpecker well may despair of this feat--
  Only the fly with you can compete!
  So much is clear; but I fain would know
  How you can so reckless and fearless go,
  Head upward, head downward, all one to you,
  Zenith and nadir the same to your view."


We have now described the American nuthatch quartette, and will turn to
other fields no less inviting, albeit more remote.  The nuthatch of
central Europe, scientifically known as _Sitta caesia_, is closely
related to our American forms, resembling them in many of his habits.
In studying the literature of the transatlantic species, we at once
stumble upon the reason for calling this avian family by the somewhat
peculiar and apparently inapt name of nuthatch.  The older English form
of the word was "nuthack," which unfortunately has been changed to
"nuthatch," a word that gives an erroneous impression, for no bird ever
hatches a nut.  But with the last syllable "hack" the difficulty is all
cleared up, as his habit of hacking or chipping nuts, which he places
in chinks of the bark or wall, is well known.

The nuthatch of England belongs to the species just named.  He does not
wear a black hood or mantle, but merely a black ribbon on the side of
his head, enclosing the eye.  His upper parts are bluish gray, save the
outer tail feathers, which are black; his cheeks and throat are white,
his breast and belly buff, and his flanks and lower tail-coverts
chestnut red.  A graphic English writer, Dr. W. H. Hudson, gives the
following enthusiastic description of the little tobogganist of his
native woodlands:

"When I see him sitting quite still for a few moments on a branch of a
tree in his most characteristic nuthatch attitude, on or under the
branch, perched horizontally or vertically, with head or tail
uppermost, but always with the body placed beetle-wise against the
bark, head raised, and the straight, sharp bill pointed like an arm
lifted to denote attention,--at such times he looks less like a living
than a sculptured bird, a bird cut out of beautifully variegated
marble--blue-gray, buff, and chestnut, and placed against the tree to
deceive the eye.  The figure is so smooth and compact, the tints so
soft and stone-like; and when he is still, he is so wonderfully still,
and his attitude so statuesque!  But he is never long still and when he
resumes his lively, eccentric, up-and-down and sidewise motions, he is
interesting in another way.  He is like a small woodpecker who has
broken loose from the woodpecker's somewhat narrow laws of progression,
preferring to be a law unto himself.

"Without a touch of brilliant color, the nuthatch is a beautiful bird
on account of the pleasing softness and harmonious disposition of his
tints; and, in like manner, without being a songster in the strict
sense of the word, his voice is so clear and far-reaching and of so
pleasing a quality, that it often gives more life and spirit to the
woods and orchards and avenues he frequents than that of many true
melodists.  This is more especially the case in the month of March,
before the migratory songsters have arrived, when he is most
loquacious.  A high pitched, clear, ringing note, repeated without
variation several times, is his most often-heard call or song.  He will
sometimes sit motionless on his perch, repeating this call at short
intervals, for half an hour at a time.  Another bird at a distance will
be doing the same, and the two appear to be answering one another.  He
also has another call, not so loud and piercing, but more melodious: a
double note, repeated two or three times, with something liquid and
gurgling in the sound, suggesting the musical sound of lapsing water.
These various notes and calls are heard incessantly until the young are
hatched, when the birds at once become silent."

The nesting habits of _caesia_ are quite similar to those of our
American forms, with the following interesting exception: The doorway
of the cavity constituting the bird's domicile is plastered up with
clay, made viscid by the nuthatch's glutinous saliva, leaving in the
center a circular hole just large enough to afford entrance and exit
for the little owner.  Says the author quoted above: "When the sitting
bird is interfered with, she defends her treasures with great courage,
hissing like a wryneck, and vigorously striking at her aggressor with
her sharp bill."  Like our common white-breast, the British bird may be
attracted to human dwellings by furnishing him a regular supply of food
suited to his taste, and may grow so trustful as to come when called,
and even to catch morsels thrown to him in the air.  In the forest he
often hammers so loudly on a resonant branch that his tattoo is
mistaken for that of a woodpecker.  The interior of the nest "contains
a bed of dry leaves, or the filmy flakes of the inner bark of a fir or
cedar, on which the eggs are laid."

In northern Europe another form of the nuthatch guild is found, known
scientifically as _Sitta europea_, whose under parts are white without
any washing of buff on the breast.

The Levant furnishes a most charming addition to the feathered
brotherhood now under consideration.  The scientific gentlemen have
christened it _Sitta syriaca_, and its common name is the rock
nuthatch, an appellation that is most appropriate, for its chosen
haunts are rocky cliffs, over the faces of which it scuttles in the
most approved nuthatch fashion, head up or down, as the whim seizes it,
clinging with its sharp claws to the chinks, ledges, protuberances, and
rough surfaces of the rocky walls.  A little larger than its European
cousin, its markings are quite similar.  In Syria it is common as far
north as the southern shores of the Black Sea.  Although somewhat shy,
it is described as having "sprightly manners and a clear, ringing
trill."  Odd indeed are some of nature's evolutions, I had almost said
caprices, for the rock nuthatch is just as much at home and apparently
just as happy on its bleak precipices as is our merry whitebreast in
his umbrageous home in the oak or maple forest.

But what kind of nests do the rock nuthatches construct on their
limestone walls?  That is one of the most interesting features of the
life of these birds.  One writer[1] who has observed them in their
native haunts describes the rock nuthatch as "an expert clay mixer and
molder."  The bird does not chisel out a nursery in the rock--no,
indeed; his method of constructing his nest is as follows: Having found
a little hollow or indentation on the rocky wall, he will erect a cap
or dome of mortar over it, plastering the structure so firmly against
the surface that no rain or storm or predaceous creeping thing can
demolish it until long after it has been abandoned by the little
architect.  The circular base of the nest is ten or twelve inches in
diameter.  The dome is not entirely closed up, but a small orifice is
left in the center, upon the edges of which a narrow neck or funnel,
also made of mortar, is raised, the hole just large enough to admit the
body of the bird.  The funnel is about three inches long.

The building material employed is fine clay softened and glutinated
with the bird's saliva and mixed with plant fibers, for the little
mason does not believe in making bricks without straw.  So well packed
is the inch-thick wall that a stiff knife blade must be used to cut
through it.  While the natural color of the adobe cottage is ash-gray,
and therefore harmonizes with the general hue of its surroundings, and
also with the mezzotints of the builder, yet he sometimes decorates it
with the gaily colored wings of moths caught in the chase and attached
to the plaster while it is fresh.  The rock nuthatch is as expert a
mixer of mortar as the well-known cliff swallows of our own country,
and his adobe dwellings bear a close resemblance to theirs.

It is interesting to note that the European nuthatch, while nesting
regularly in tree cavities, sometimes also chooses the crannies of
rocks, when he goes a little more extensively into the plastering
business; but his skill is not so well developed as that of his
oriental cousin, whose mud cottage is a model of its kind.



[1] The writer referred to is Mr. H. C. Tracy, to whose charming
article in "The Wilson Bulletin," published at Oberlin, Ohio, I am
indebted for all my material on the rock nuthatch.




A FEATHERED PARASITE*

*Reprinted from Appleton's "Popular Science Monthly," with additions.


Nothing could more clearly prove that a common law runs through the
whole domain of Nature than the fact that in every division of her
realm there seems to be a class of parasites.  In the vegetable world,
as is well known, there are various plants that depend wholly on other
plants for the supply of their vital forces.  And in the human sphere
there are parasites in a very real and literal sense--men and women who
rely upon the toil and thrift of others to sustain them in worthless
idleness.

In view of the almost universal character of this law it would be
strange if these peculiar forms of dependence did not appear in the
avian community.  We do find such developments in that department of
creation.  Across the waters there is one bird that has won an
unenviable reputation as a parasite: the European cuckoo relies almost
wholly on the efforts of its more thrifty neighbors to hatch and rear
its young, and thereby perpetuate the species.  Strangely enough, our
American cuckoos are not given to such slovenly habits, but build their
own nests and faithfully perform the duties of nidification, as all
respectable feathered folk should.  However, this parasitical habit
breaks out, quite unexpectedly, it must be conceded, in another
American family of birds entirely distinct from the cuckoo group.

In America the cowbird, often called the cow bunting, is the only
member of the avian household that spirits its eggs into the nests of
other birds.  The theory of evolution can do little toward accounting
for the anomaly, and even if it should venture upon some suggestions it
would still be just as difficult to explain the cause of the evolution
in this special group, while all other avian groups follow the law of
thrift and self-reliance.

[Illustration: Cowbird]

The cowbird belongs to the family of birds scientifically known as
_Icteridae_, which includes such familiar species as the bobolinks,
orioles, meadowlarks, and the various kinds of blackbirds, none of
which, I am glad to say, are parasites.  The name _Molothrus_ has been
given to the genus that includes the cowbirds.  They are confined to
the American continent, having no analogues in the lands across the
seas.  The same may be said, indeed, of the whole _Icteridae_ family.
It may be a matter of surprise to many persons that there are twelve
species and subspecies of cowbirds in North and South America, for most
of us are familiar only with the common cowbird (_Molothrus ater_) of
our temperate regions.  Of these twelve species only three are to be
found within the limits of the United States, one is a resident of
western Mexico and certain parts of Central America, while the rest
find habitat exclusively in South America.  A fresh field of
investigation is open to some enterprising and ambitious naturalist who
wishes to study several of these species, as comparatively little is
known of their habits, and indeed much still remains to be learned of
the whole genus, familiar as one or two of the species are.  Their sly,
surreptitious manners render them exceedingly difficult to study at
close range and with anything like satisfactory detail.

Are all of them parasites?  Probably they are--at least to a greater or
less degree--except one, the bay-winged cowbird of South America, which
I shall reserve for notice later on in this chapter.  We might assert
that our common cowbirds are the parasites _par excellence_ of the
family, for, so far as I can learn from reading and observation, they
never build their own nests or rear their own young, but shift all the
duties of maternity, save the laying of the eggs, upon the shoulders of
other innocent birds.

These avian "spongers" have a wide geographical range, inhabiting the
greater part of the United States and southern Canada, except the
extensive forest regions and some portions of the southern states.
They are most abundant in the states bordering on the upper Mississippi
River and its numerous tributaries.  On the Pacific coast west of the
Cascade and Sierra Nevada mountains, they occur only as stragglers.
The most northern point at which they have been known to breed is the
neighborhood of Little Slave Lake in southern Athabaska.  In the autumn
the majority of these birds migrate to southern Mexico, although a
considerable number remain in our southern states, and a few
occasionally tarry for the winter even as far north as New England and
southern Michigan.

The male cowbird looks like a well-dressed gentleman--and may have even
a slightly clerical air--in his closely fitting suit of glossy black,
with its greenish and purplish iridescence, and his hood of rich
metallic brown covering his head, neck, and chest.  He makes a poor
shift as a musician, but his failure is not due to lack of effort, for
during courtship days he does his level best to sing a variety of
tunes, expanding and distorting his throat, fluffing up his feathers,
spreading out his wings and tail, his purpose evidently being to make
himself as fascinating as possible in the eyes of his lady love.  One
of his calls sounds like "spreele," piped in so piercing a key that it
seems almost to perforate your brain.

One observer maintains that the cowbirds are not only parasitical in
their habits, but are also absolutely devoid of conjugal affection,
practicing polyandry, and seldom even mating.  This is a serious
charge, but it is doubtless true, for even during the season of
courtship and breeding these birds live in flocks of six to twelve, the
males almost always outnumbering the females.  However, if their family
relations are somewhat irregular, no one can accuse them of engaging in
brawls, as so many other birds do, for both males and females seem to
be on the most amicable terms with one another, and are, to all
appearances, entirely free from jealousy.  Who has ever seen two
cowbirds fighting a duel like the orioles, meadowlarks, and robins?

In obtruding her eggs into the nests of other birds, Madame Cowbird is
sly and stealthy.  She does not drive the rightful owners from their
nests, but simply watches her opportunity to drop her eggs into them
when they are unguarded.  No doubt she has been on the alert while her
industrious neighbors have been constructing their domiciles, and knows
where almost every nest in the vicinity is hidden.  Says Major Charles
Bendire: "In rare instances only will a fresh cowbird's egg be found
among incubated ones of the rightful owners.  I have observed this only
on a single occasion."  From one to seven eggs of the parasite are
found in the nests of the dupes.  In most cases the number is two, but
in the case of ground builders the cowbird seems to have little fear of
overdoing her imposition.  Major Bendire says that he once found the
nest of an oven-bird containing seven cowbird's eggs and only one of
the little owner's.

If parasitism were the only crime of the cowbird one would not feel so
much disposed to put her into the Newgate Calendar; but she not only
inflicts her own eggs upon her innocent victims, but often actually
tosses their eggs out of the nests in order to make room for her own.
Nor is that all; she will sometimes puncture the eggs of the owners to
prevent their hatching, and thus increase the chances of her own
offspring.  Whether this is done with her beak or her claws is still an
open question, Major Bendire inclining to the belief that it is done
with the claws.

Her finesse is still further to be seen in the fact that she usually
selects some bird for a victim that is smaller than herself, so that
when her young hopefuls begin to grow they will be able to crowd or
starve out the true heirs of the family.  In this way it is thought
that many a brood comes to an untimely end, the foster parents having
no means of replacing their own little ones when they have been ejected
from the nest.  However, I doubt whether the cowbird's impositions are
usually so destructive as some observers are inclined to believe.  I
once found a bush sparrow's nest containing one cowbird and four little
sparrows, all of which were in a thriving condition.  The sparrows were
so well fed and active that as soon as I touched the nest they sprang,
with loud chirping, over the rim of their cottage and scuttled away
through the grass.  They were certainly strong and healthy, in spite of
the presence of their big foster brother.  Before they flitted away I
had time to notice how the little family were disposed.  The cowbird
was squatted in the center of the nest, while his little foster
brothers and sisters were ranged around him, partly covering him and no
doubt keeping him snug and warm.  They were further advanced than he,
for while they scrambled from the nest, he could do nothing but snuggle
close on the bottom of the cup.

A wood thrush's nest that I found contained two young thrushes and two
buntings.  All of them were about half fledged.  Being of nearly the
same size, the queerly assorted bantlings lived in apparent peace in
their narrow quarters.  I watched them at frequent intervals, but saw
no attempts on the part of the foundlings to crowd out their
fellow-nestlings.  The cowbirds were the first to leave the sylvan roof
tree.  Thus it appears that the intrusion of the cowbird's eggs does
not always mean disaster to the real offspring of the brooding family,
but of course it often prevents the laying of the full complement of
eggs by the builders themselves.

Even after the youngsters have left the nest the mother cowbird does
not assume the care of them, but still leaves them in charge of the
foster parents.  It is laughable, almost pathetic, to see a tiny
oven-bird or redstart feeding a strapping young cowbird which is
several times as large as herself.  She looks like a pigmy feeding a
giant.  In order to thrust a tidbit into his mouth she must often stand
on her tiptoes.  Why the diminutive caterer does not see through the
fraud I can not say.  She really seems to be attached to the hulking
youngster.  By and by, however, when he grows large enough to shift for
himself, he deserts his little parents and nurses and seeks
companionship among his own blood kindred, who doubtless bring him up
in the way all cowbirds should go.

It is surprising how many species are imposed on successfully by the
cowbird.  The number, so far as has been observed, is ninety, with
probably more to be added.  Among the birds most frequently victimized
are the phoebes, the song sparrows, the indigo birds, the bush
sparrows, and the yellow-breasted chats.  Even the nests of the
red-headed woodpecker and the rock wrens are not exempt.  Some species,
notably the summer warblers, detect the imposture and set about
defeating the purposes of the interloper by building another story to
their little cottage, leaving the obtruded eggs in the cellar, where
they do not receive enough warmth to develop the embryo.

While it is surprising that acute birds should allow themselves to be
imposed on in this way, perhaps, after all, they look upon the cowbird
as a kind of blessing in disguise; at least, he may not be an unmixed
evil.  They may act on the principle of reciprocity--that "one good
turn deserves another."  What I mean is this: In my rambles I have
often found the cowbirds the first to give warning of the approach of a
supposed danger.  Having no domestic duties of their own, they can well
secrete themselves in a tall tree overlooking the entire premises, and
thus play the useful role of sentinel.  This, I am disposed to believe,
is one of the compensating uses of this parasite, and may furnish the
reason for his being tolerated in birdland.  And he is tolerated.  Has
any one ever seen other birds driving the cowbird away from their
breeding precincts, or charging him with desperate courage, as they do
the blue jays, the hawks, the owls, and other predatory species?  He
evidently subserves some useful purpose in the avian community, or he
would not be treated with so much consideration.

A young cowbird that I purloined from the nest and tried to rear by
hand did not prove a pleasant pet.  He was placed in a large cage with
several other kinds of young birds.  At first he was quite docile,
taking his food from my hand and even allowing some of his feathered
companions to feed him; but in a few weeks he grew so wild and
manifested such a fierce desire for the outdoor world that I was glad
to carry him out to the woods and give him his freedom.  A young
red-winged blackbird and a pair of meadowlarks developed a different
disposition.

The dwarf cow-bird (_Molothrus ater obscurus_) is similar to his
relative just described, except that he is smaller and his geographical
range is more restricted.  He is a resident of Mexico, southern Texas,
southwestern Arizona, and southern California.  His habits resemble
those of the common cowbird.  Another bunting having almost the same
range, although a little more southerly, is the red-eyed cowbird, which
is larger and darker than our common cowbird and has the same
parasitical habits.

In South America three species have been studied by Mr. W. H. Hudson,
who, in collaboration with Mr. P. L. Sclater, has published a most
valuable work on Argentine ornithology.  One of these is called the
Argentine cowbird (_Molothrus bonariensis_).  It is a blue-blooded
parasite, and has been seen striking its beak into the eggs of other
birds and flying away with them.  The males, it is said, show little
discrimination in pecking the eggs, for they are just as likely to
puncture the cowbird eggs as those of other birds.  Every egg in a nest
is frequently perforated in this way.  These buntings lay a large
number of eggs, often dropping them on the ground, laying them in
abandoned nests, or depositing them in nests in which incubation has
already begun, in which case all of them are lost.  However, in spite
of this wastefulness the birds thrive, thousands of them being seen in
flocks during the season of migration.

And, by the way, a description of their habits by Mr. Hudson has thrown
interesting light on the subject of migration in the southern
hemisphere.  South of the equator the recurrence of the seasons is the
exact reverse of their recurrence north of the equator, and therefore
the breeding season of the birds is in the autumn instead of the
spring; the flight from winter cold occurs in the spring instead of in
the autumn, and is toward the north instead of toward the south.  Thus,
in February and March the Argentine cowbirds are seen flying in vast
battalions in the direction of the equatorial regions--that is,
northward--in whose salubrious clime they spend the winter.  As our
northern autumn draws near and the southern spring approaches these
winged migrants take the air line for their breeding haunts in the
Argentine Republic and Patagonia.  At the same time the migrants of the
northern hemisphere are pressing southward before the blustering north
wind.  It all seems wonderful and solemn, this world-wide processional
of the seasons and the birds.

Naturally one would expect to find some other eccentricities in this
aberrant family besides that of parasitism, and in this expectation one
is not disappointed.  There are two other species of cowbirds in the
Argentine country--the screaming cowbird (_Molothrus rufoaxillaris_)
and the bay-winged cowbird (_Molothrus badius_).  The latter is only
partly a trencher on the rights of other birds--only half a parasite.
Indeed, it sometimes builds its own nest, which is quite a respectable
affair; but, as if to prove that it still has some remnants of cowbird
depravity in its nature, it frequently drives other birds from their
rightful possessions, appropriates the quarters thus acquired, lays its
eggs into them, and proceeds to the performance of its domestic duties
like its respectable neighbors.  Its virtue is that it never imposes
the work of incubation and brood rearing on any of its feathered
associates, even though it does sometimes eject them from their
premises.

But what is to be said of the screaming cowbird?  Instead of inflicting
its eggs on its more distant avian relatives, it watches its chance and
slyly drops them into the domicile of its bay-winged cousins, and
actually makes them hatch and rear its offspring!  This seems to be
carrying imposture to the extreme of refinement, or possibly developing
it into a fine art, and reminds one of those human good-for-naughts who
"sponge" off their relatives rather than go among strangers.

Before closing this chapter I must call attention to one of the most
surprising discoveries ever made by an American observer of bird ways.
It was reported some time after my article on the cowbird was first
published in Appleton's "Popular Science Monthly."  The observer was
Joseph F. Honecker, whose statement was printed in "American
Ornithology" for June, 1902, and runs as follows:

"As ornithologists and all bird students think and believe that the
cowbird will build no nest, but always lays in the nests of other
birds, I am glad to give the results of my experiments.  In order to
get the desired results, in the spring of 1899 I secured a pair of
cowbirds and placed them in a large cage, cared well for them, and
supplied them with plenty of nesting material.  To my surprise, the
female built a nest, laid four eggs, hatched them, and reared the
young, and on July twenty-eighth, young and old were given their
freedom.  This will show that the cowbird will build a nest and care
for its young in captivity, while in its wild life it has never been
known to do so."

A BLUE CANNIBAL*

*Reprinted by permission from "The Evening Post," New York.


In his coat of light blue, trimmed with white and black, bearing his
crest jauntily atop of his head, the blue jay presents an attractive
picture.  And, indeed, although I myself feel that the Baltimore
oriole, the scarlet tanager, the ruby-throated hummingbird, and many of
the wood warblers carry off the palm for brilliancy of plumage, there
are persons who declare that the jay is the most handsomely colored
bird in our temperate regions.

While the jay dons an engaging attire, not much can be said in the way
of eulogy for his vocal talents or acquirements.  Many of his calls are
harsh, penetrating, and even raucous.  Frequently, too, he indulges in
a great to-do over nothing, fairly splitting your ears with his noisy
cries.  I have said it is a to-do over nothing, though Mr. Jay may
think he has the best reason in the world for making a fuss.  Often
espying some coveted prize on the ground in my back yard, instead of
quietly dropping down and taking it, he and his companions would dash
about in the trees, swing their bodies sidewise and up and down in an
excited way, and scream at the top of their voices, sometimes drawing
me out of the house to see what had gone wrong in Jaydom.  They seemed
to be determined to attract the attention of every person on the
premises to the fact that they wanted that morsel on the ground, but
were afraid to venture down after it.  Perhaps they meant by their
objurgations to test their human neighbors, to ascertain whether any of
them were prowling about with a gun or a sling, ready to do them harm.
If there should be any such prowlers, probably the jays meant to induce
them to come out of their ambush, to show themselves in the open, and
give their jayships a chance to escape.  Bird psychology, as you will
have occasion to note more than once, is a good deal of an enigma.  How
often we would give a handsome bonus to a bird if he would let us know
precisely what he was thinking about!

[Illustration: Blue Jay]

Although no musician, the jay has quite an extensive vocal repertory.
Besides his loud, challenging call, he frequently utters a series of
calls that have a pensive quality and that fill the mind with an
indefinable foreboding, especially on chill autumn days when all the
woods are bare and gray and the wind is moaning through the boughs.
Sometimes when a jay is hidden in a copse, he utters a low, scolding
sputter, that seems to express the very quintessence of disgust.  It is
simply his way of telling you what he thinks of a man who goes prowling
about without leave in the precincts of the birds.

Have you ever heard the jay's brief musical roulade?  It is only a wisp
of melody, rarely rich and suggestive, heard a moment, then gone.  You
know something sweet has passed by, but something so brief and elusive
that you scarcely know what it was.  Long after it has dropped on your
ear, it continues to haunt your memory, and you try again and again to
reproduce it, but in vain.  It has a kind of gurgling quality, as if
the bird were pressing his notes through an aqueous lyre, if such a
conception is possible.  Besides, I have, on more than one occasion,
heard a jay warble a soft, reserved little lay that was continued for
many minutes.  It sounded very like the song of the brown thrasher,
much modulated and partly uttered under its breath--a sort of flowing,
rythmical melody.

A question that disturbs all bird lovers more or less is this: Does the
fine white vest of the jay cover a bad heart?  Is he really a thief, a
nest robber, or even worse, a cannibal, in plumes?  May the guardian
spirit of all feathered folk forbid that I should blacken the
reputation of any bird, yet honesty compels me to give an affirmative
answer to the foregoing question.  I hasten, however, to say that I do
not believe he is as black as he has been painted by some observers,
who seem to delight in making out a verdict of capital guilt against
him.  Although a predatory bird, he is not engaged all the time in
bloodthirsty pursuits, but only while his young are in the nest
clamoring for food.  What are some of the proofs of his vandalism?  I
will mention a few of them.

First, almost all the small birds make uncompromising war upon him,
especially in the breeding season, and many of them show signs of dire
distress when he goes near their nests.  They often utter pitiful
cries, droop their wings, and the bravest of them dash at him savagely,
giving him many a cuff on the head and back.  The wood pewee and the
kingbird succeed, I think, in driving him away; but the vireos and
warblers, being so much smaller, suffer greatly from his depredations.
If there were no real cause for it, these birds would not be filled
with panic and rage on account of the jay's presence.  There is strong
presumptive evidence that they know him for an outlaw only too well.

The following incident will furnish positive proof of the jay's
cannibalistic proclivities: One spring my little boy brought home from
the country a young house wren, thinking it would make a delightful
pet.  It was quite well fledged, but its short tail and white mouth
border proclaimed the tenderness of its youth.  Fearing that the little
thing could not be reared by hand, as it refused all our proffered
tidbits, and chirped continually for its parents, I persuaded the lad
to give it its freedom.  A mother wren living on our premises seemed
inclined to adopt the little waif, and we decided to put it under her
care.  No sooner was the youngling let out of the cage than it flew to
the side of the house and began to scramble up the brick wall.  It had
a hard tug, but at length succeeded in reaching a resting place on a
window-shutter of the second story.

Presently the mother wren heard its calls and paid it a visit; but
instead of feeding it, she seemed very anxious to drive it away,
knowing, no doubt, that there were predaceous enemies in the
neighborhood.  In her attempts to drive it into hiding, she pecked it
on the head and in the mouth.  Then she dropped down into a thicket and
secured a green worm, with which she flew up to the chirping waif's
perch; but I could not make out that she fed the birdling, though she
thrust the worm toward its open mouth.  Soon after she had gone off the
second time, the little bird clambered around the corner of the wall to
the lower side of the house, where it rested a while on a narrow shelf.

All this time my boy and I were watching it intently.  Suddenly a blue
jay came flying over from one of the trees of an adjacent yard, moving
in a rapid, stealthy way.  First it plunged into an apple tree at the
corner of the house; then, before I could collect my wits enough to
know what was happening, it darted over to the brick wall, seized the
little wren with its bill, and bore it off.  The mother wren followed,
uttering a pitiful chatter, while the little victim called loudly for
help.  The blue kidnapper darted to a tree in my neighbor's yard, where
he put his booty under his claw on a limb, holding it by one slender
leg, while its body dangled below.  Hoping still to rescue the little
captive, I sprang over into the adjacent yard with a loud shout and
much waving of my hands; but my vigorous efforts only caused the jay to
pick up the wren in its bill and continue its flight, and neither wren
nor jay was seen by me again.  This incident furnishes unimpeachable
testimony against the character of the blue-coated Robin Hood.  There
was no faltering or hesitancy in his conduct, but he seized and carried
off his little victim as if he were to the manner born, and had become
hardened by practice in depredations of the sort.

A farmer once related the following incident to me: A pair of chipping
sparrows had built a nest in a bush in his front yard.  One day after
the little ones had arrived, he heard a distressed chirping coming from
the parent birds, and on going to the front yard, he caught a blue jay
in the act of picking a callow bantling from the chippie's nest.
Holding it in his bill, the jay flew across the field with his prize,
and presently returned and bore off a second nestling.  By this time
the farmer's ire was aroused; he bolted into the house and secured his
shotgun, and when the marauding jay came back on the third trip on
robbery intent, the man brought him to the ground with a shot that
ended his career.

Yet the jay is not wholly bad--indeed, not even half bad.  Before me
lies a valuable pamphlet entitled "The Blue Jay and His Food," written
by F. E. L. Beal, Assistant Biologist of the Department of Agriculture
at Washington, whose researches have converted him into something of an
apologist for our blue gentleman in feathers.  He dissected the
stomachs of 292 jays, collected during every month of the year in
twenty-two states, the District of Columbia, and Canada.  After stating
that mineral substances in the stomachs examined averaged over 14 per
cent of the total contents, Mr. Beal says:

"The real food is composed of 24.3 per cent of animal matter and 75.7
per cent of vegetable matter, or a trifle more than three times as much
vegetable as animal.  The animal food is chiefly made up of insects,
with a few spiders, myriapods, snails, and small vertebrates, such as
fish, salamanders, tree frogs, mice, and birds.  Everything was
carefully examined which might by any possibility indicate that birds
or eggs had been eaten, but remains of birds were found in only two,
and the shells of small birds' eggs in only three of the 292 stomachs.
One of these, taken on February tenth, contained the bones, claws, and
a little skin of a bird's foot.  Another, taken on June twenty-fourth,
contained the remains of a young bird.  The three stomachs with bird's
eggs were collected in June, August, and October, respectively.  The
shell eaten in October belonged to the egg of some larger bird like the
ruffed grouse and, considering the time of year, was undoubtedly merely
an empty shell from an old nest.  Shells of eggs which were identified
as those of domesticated fowls, or some bird of equal size, were found
in eleven stomachs, collected at irregular times during the year.  This
evidence would seem to show that more eggs of domesticated fowls than
of wild birds are destroyed, but it is much more probable that these
shells were obtained from refuse heaps about farm-houses."

Mr. Beal's dissections are very significant, proving that the jay is
not only not so destructive of eggs and bantlings as was supposed, but
also that he destroys many noxious insects, and is, therefore, a bird
of real economic value.  The great bulk of his insect diet consists of
beetles, grasshoppers, and caterpillars, with a few bugs, wasps, and
flies, and an occasional spider and myriapod.  The average of insect
food for the whole year was 23 per cent, varying from less than 1 per
cent in January to over 66 per cent in August, and it is gratifying to
know that predaceous beetles and tent caterpillars form a large part of
the jay's bill of fare.

His demands upon domesticated fruits and grains are comparatively
light.  He cares more for acorns and mast than for corn.  The last he
does not greatly relish, but eats it chiefly when the snow covers his
favorite food.  It is a little surprising that he occasionally varies
his diet with fish, salamanders, tree frogs, mice, and shrews.  Mr.
Beal's conclusion is put in the following sentence, which closes his
valuable monograph: "In fact, the examination of nearly three hundred
stomachs shows that the blue jay does far more good than harm."

An important question, therefore, from more than one point of view is:
Should we ever kill the blue jay?  Perhaps as sensible an answer to
that question as can be given is this: We should by no means engage in
a war of extermination upon the jays, but it might be wise, when they
become too abundant, to thin out their numbers somewhat by shooting
some of them or driving them away.  It can scarcely be denied that if
they are permitted to thrive without hindrance, and grow to large
numbers, they will become sorely destructive of the eggs and nestlings
of more desirable birds.  I assure you, however, that I make this
statement with reluctance and reserve, for the handsome blue-coat is
one of our most cunning and interesting birds, and would be greatly
missed if he were exterminated.

The blue jay is also a plucky bird, as I discovered one day not so very
long ago.  A pair of jays had a nest in a little park in front of my
house, and one day one of the youngsters, which were still unable to
fly, dropped to the ground.  Fearing the cats or evilly disposed boys
might catch the little fellow, I thought to do him and his parents a
good turn by catching him and putting him up in one of the trees beyond
the reach of his enemies.  After quite a chase I succeeded in catching
him.  But the parent birds, flitting and calling in the trees, did not
understand my well-meant intentions, and so one of them swung down and
struck me on the top of the head with so much force that, either with
his bill or his claws; he punctured the skin and made the blood come,
leaving a scar on my crown for quite a while.  The pesky thing!  I
think he might have known that I was his friend--but he didn't, his
instinct not being a sure guide that time.  But who can blame him?  Not
an hour afterwards the youngling again fell to the ground, when some
children found it and killed it without the least excuse for their
action.  In such a case how could the parent birds distinguish between
friend and foe?  They found their little one lying dead on the ground,
and mourned for it with heart-broken cries.

Some things cause a great to-do in the jay world.  One day, while I was
living in Kansas, the skeleton of a jay, with the feathers still
attached, was found in the rubbish of an ash-pile in my rear yard, and
exposed to view.  An hour later a half dozen or more jays were flinging
about in the peach tree above the feathers of their dead comrade,
screaming at the top of their voices, "juking" their bodies, as is
their wont when excited, and glaring at the disheveled plumes on the
ground.  If it was a funeral service, it certainly was a demonstrative
one, and I do not believe that their grief and terror were affected.




A HANDSOME SCISSORSTAIL*

*Reprinted by permission from "American Ornithology," with important
additions.


In order to study the scissorstailed flycatcher (_Milvulus
forficatus_), of which some friends had told me again and again in a
glow of enthusiasm, I made a trip to southern Kansas and northern
Oklahoma.  Several days passed before an individual of this species put
in appearance, as the scissorstails, which are migrants, had not yet
returned from their winter quarters in a more southern clime, and so I
had to wait for their arrival.

One day a friend and I were driving along a country road over the
prairie, when a quaint bird form went swinging from the wire fence by
the roadside toward a clump of willows in a shallow dip of the prairie.
Dashing after him, I heard a clear, musical call that proclaimed a bird
with which I had not yet become acquainted.

In a few moments he flew from the tree.  My binocular was fixed upon
him as he went flitting across the field and presently alighted on the
ground.  My surmise was correct; it was the scissorstail flycatcher,
one of the most unique and handsome birds belonging to our American
avifauna, one that merits more than a passing notice.  To see him
perched on a fence, or swinging gracefully through the air, and hear
his bell-like calls and whistles makes you feel as if you were suddenly
transported to a foreign land, like Australia or Borneo, where so many
feathered curios are to be found.

In a fever of excitement I followed the bird, which presently flew back
to the fence by the roadside.  He flitted from point to point as my
friend and I slowly pursued him, giving us an exhibition of his
scissoring process.  Sometimes he would alight on a post, then on the
barbed wire, usually sitting flat on his breast.  When open, the tail
is bicolored, the outer border all around being white and the inner
black.  His general color is hoary ash, paler, almost white, below,
giving out a slight iridescence in the sunshine; his wings are
blackish, with white trimmings; his flanks are stained with salmon-red,
and when his wings are spread, there appears a large blotch of scarlet
at the inner angle of the intersection with the body.  One individual
that I afterwards saw wore a scarlet epaulet, which was almost
concealed by the other plumes when the wing was closed, but was clearly
seen when it was extended.  An orange or scarlet gem adorns the crown,
but is so well hidden by the other crest feathers that it is seldom
noticed.

My friend and I were privileged to witness a rare and attractive
scissorstail show, more gratifying than any circus performance.  A
loggerhead shrike suddenly appeared on the scene, and made an assault
on the flycatcher.  The two birds went gyrating, zigzagging, see-sawing
through the air in a perfect jumble of white and black and ash.  It
must be remembered that the shrike himself makes a handsome picture on
the wing, and when you come to mix up a scissorstail and a shrike in
inextricable confusion, you have a feathery display worth seeing.

Nor was that the end of the exhibition, for in a moment a second
scissorstail, the precise _facsimile_ of the first, appeared from
somewhere, and the two flycatchers combined against their enemy.  Then
for a few minutes there was such a chaos of shrike and scissorstail
that we could scarcely tell which was which.  By and by the shrike
wheeled away, when, as if to bring the gladiatorial show to a climax,
the scissorstails engaged in a set-to that was really wonderful, coming
together in the air, whirling around and around, rising in a spiral
course, opening and closing their beautiful forked tails in quick
succession, the black and white trimmings flashing momentarily, then
disappearing, until the contestants finally descended, parted in the
most graceful manner, and alighted on separate fence posts, none the
worse for their _melee_.

In the evening I returned to the enchanted spot, but the scissorstails
had disappeared.  Not having had my fill of these charmers, I stopped,
on my return home, for a day at Wellington, Kansas, where I was so
fortunate as to find three birds of this species, who permitted me to
watch them to my heart's content.  They are not shy birds, but fly in a
graceful, leisurely way from post to post along the fence as you walk
or drive, sometimes sitting quietly to let you pass by.  In this
respect their habits are much like those of their cousin, the kingbird.

As his name indicates, our bird is the proud possessor of a genuine
scissorstail, composed of two long, slender prongs that are spread far
apart under certain conditions of flight.  Let me describe the process
minutely, for it is unique here in North America where fork-tailed
birds are rare.

When the bird starts up from a perch, he spreads apart the prongs of
his tail for a moment, as if to give himself a spring; then he closes
them in a single slender stem, tapering outward to a point, keeping
them closed during prolonged flight, and just as he sweeps down to
another perch, he opens his ornamental scissors again, shutting them up
as soon as he has settled upon his resting place.  He does not open and
close his tail at regular intervals during flight, as might be
supposed, but keeps it closed until he descends to a perch, when it is
opened for a moment in the act of alighting.  However, if he has
occasion to wheel or make a sudden turn in the air, either for an
insect or in a playful prank, his scissors fly open, one might almost
say spontaneously, no doubt serving the double purpose of rudder and
balancing pole.  When closed, the tail is very narrow, looking almost
like a single plume.  On the perch (except when he desires to shift his
position, when he also makes use of his wings) his tail is closed.
Therefore the picture of this bird in Dr. Coues's "Key to North
American Birds" is not accurate, for it represents our bird in the
sitting posture with the tines of his fork spread apart.  If the wings
were outstretched, representing the bird in the act of alighting or
shifting his position, the picture would be true to scissorstail life.

The range of these birds is somewhat restricted, and for that reason,
doubtless, so little is known about their habits.  According to
Ridgway, their proper home is in eastern Mexico and the southwestern
prairie districts of the United States, though many of them come north
as far as southern Kansas and southwestern Missouri to spend the summer
and rear their families.  In winter they go as far south as Costa Rico.
Restricted as their habitat is, it is curious to note that they are
"accidental" in a few unexpected places, such as Key West, Fla.,
Norfolk, Va., and also in several localities in New England, Manitoba,
and Hudson Bay Territory.  Prof. W. W. Cooke, of Colorado, says they
are "rare, if not accidental," in that state.  To show that our birds
are unique, it is relevant to say that there are only two species of
scissors-tailed flycatchers in North America, which have the genus
_Milvulus_ all to themselves.  The other member of the genus is the
forked-tailed flycatcher (_Milvulus tyrannus_), a resident of tropical
America, migrating north normally as far as southern Mexico.  He is a
sort of southern twin of our scissorstail.

The nests of the scissorstails are set in the crotches of trees in the
neighborhood of country homes on the prairie.  Considering the size of
the birds, their nests are quite small, not so large as those of the
brown thrashers, though the cup is deeper and the architecture more
compact and elaborate.  A friend describes a nest which he found on a
locust tree about sixteen feet from the ground.  It was made mostly of
dry grass and locust blossoms, with here and there a piece of twine
braided into the structure.  It had no special lining, but the grass
was more evenly woven on the inside of the cup than elsewhere.

From three to five eggs are deposited.  The ground color is white,
either pure or creamy, sparingly mottled with rich madder-brown and
lilac-gray, the spots being thicker and larger on the larger end.
While the nest is undergoing examination, the owners circle and hover
overhead, much after the fashion of the red-winged blackbirds,
expressing their disapproval in loud and musical calls, and displaying
their rich scarlet decorations.

My descriptions have related only to the male bird, whose beautiful
forked tail is nine to ten inches long, and whose colors are clear and
more or less intense.  His spouse resembles him, but is slightly
smaller, while her tail, though forked like her mate's, is from two and
a half to three inches shorter.  The salmon and scarlet ornaments on
the sides, flanks, and axillars are paler than those of her lord, and
the scarlet spot shows very indistinctly on her occiput.  The young of
both sexes don the dress of the mother bird during the first season,
save that they fail to adorn themselves with a scarlet gem on the crown.

Like all the members of the flycatcher group, the scissorstails capture
insects while on the wing, making many an attractive picture as they
perform their graceful and interesting evolutions in the air.

It was a year or two later that I saw a scissorstail performing his
ablutions in the northwestern part of Arkansas.  How do you suppose he
went about it?  Not in the way birds usually do, by squatting down in
the shallow water, twinkling their wings and tail, and sprinkling the
liquid all over their plumage.  No; this bird has a reputation to
maintain for originality, and therefore he took his bath in this
manner: First he perched on a telegraph wire by the roadside; then he
swung gracefully down to a little pond, dashed lightly into the water,
giving himself a slight wetting, after which he flew up to his original
perch on the wire.  A minute or less was then spent in preening his
plumes; but they were not moist enough to suit his purpose, so he
darted down to the pond again, making the spray rise as lie struck the
water; then up to his perch he swung again, to arrange his feathers;
and this was repeated a number of times, till his toilet was completed.
It would not be safe to risk saying that the scissorstail always takes
his bath in this way; but I know this one did.  I once saw a kingbird
doing the same thing, and so it may be a fashion in flycatcher circles.

I am minded, in order to make this monograph more complete, to borrow a
couple of paragraphs from Mrs. Bailey's "Handbook of Birds of the
Western United States."  She has studied the bird in the Southwest, and
gives the following graphic description of the bird and its habits:

"One of his favorite performances is to fly up and, with rattling
wings, execute an aërial seesaw, a line of sharp-angled VVVVVVV's,
helping himself at the short turns by rapidly opening and shutting his
long white scissors.  As he goes up and down he utters all the while a
penetrating scream, _Ka-quee-ka-quee-ka-quee-ka-quee-ka-quee_, the
emphasis being given each time at the top of the ascending line.

"Frequently when he is passing along with the even flight of a
sober-minded crow, and you are quietly admiring the salmon lining of
his wings, he shoots rattling into the air, and, as you stare after
him, drops back as suddenly as he rose.  He does this apparently
because the spirit moves him, as a boy slings a stone at the sky, but
fervor is added by the appearance of a rival or an enemy, for he is
much like a _Tyrannus_ in his masterful way of controlling the
landscape.  He will attack caracaras and white-necked ravens, lighting
on their backs and giving them vicious blows while screaming in their
ears."




AN ALPINE ROSY FINCH*

*Part of the material used in this chapter has already appeared in the
author's work entitled "Birds of the Rockies," but it is here printed
in different form, that of a monograph, with a number of additional
facts.  The writer feels that the readers of the present volume will
relish at least a taste of bird study among the alpine heights of the
Rocky Mountains.  The article is reprinted from the "Denver Post,"
whose courtesy is hereby acknowledged.


The common name of the subject of this sketch is the brown-capped rosy
finch; in the scientific works on ornithology he is called the
brown-capped leucosticte.  He is certainly a bird of peculiar habits
and out-of-the-way preferences.  Should he send you his card from his
summer residence, it would read something like this: "At home in the
mountains of Colorado, from 10,000 feet above sea-level to the summits
of the highest peaks."  There is only one other bird in Colorado that
has so high a summer range, and that is the white-tailed ptarmigan,
usually called, in hunter's parlance, the "mountain quail."

The rosy finch is slightly larger than the bluebird.  His general color
is light brown, suffused with a beautiful pink or rosy tint, the dark
shaft lines and pale edges of the feathers of the back giving it a
striped appearance.  The forepart of the top of the head is blackish,
and the cap is brown, from which he gets the qualifying adjective of
his name.  In the best nuptial plumage the rosy coloring is heightened
to an intense crimson, especially on the wings, tail coverts, and the
under parts.  The female's attire is paler and duller of tint, the pink
being sometimes almost obsolete.  Oddly enough, in summer the bills of
these birds are deep black, while in winter they become yellow, only
the tip remaining black or blackish.

My introduction to the leucostictes occurred on the summit of Pikes
Peak, at an elevation of 14,147 feet above the level of the sea.  With
exhausting toil I climbed the peak one night, and the next morning,
when I stepped out of the signal station, where I had secured lodging,
a flock of the brown-caps were flitting merrily about the garbage heap,
helping themselves to an early breakfast.  Their blithe chirping
sounded very much like conversation all among themselves, and
proclaimed two pleasant traits of character--cheerfulness and good
temper.  It was evident that they were happy and contented in their
alpine home, in the upper story of the world, the rare, cool,
exhilarating air, the majestic panoramas, and the unlimited freedom all
contributing to the blithesomeness of their spirits.  The keepers of
the signal station told me that the birds came to the refuse pile every
day for their meals.

Two years later, on the twenty-eighth of June, a friend and I clambered
up Grays Peak, which is several hundred feet higher than Pikes Peak.
It was a long and toilsome climb, winding about the snowbeds of the
mountain side.  Sometimes we scaled straight up the acclivity on "all
fours," throwing ourselves down on the rocks at frequent intervals to
rest our aching limbs and fill our lungs with the rarefied air; up and
up and up, until at last, with a long pull and a strong pull, we stood
on the sky-haunting ridge above all the surrounding elevations, looking
down upon the rest of the world, which seemed to be crouching at our
feet.

Long before we reached the summit we were saluted by a new bird
voice--one that had not been heard farther down the mountain.  It was a
cordial chirp, which seemed to bid us welcome to the alpine region and
to assure us that there was no risk in climbing to these sky-aspiring
summits.  A glance proved that our little salutarian was the
brown-capped rosy finch, which I had not seen since my ascent of Pikes
Peak.  Down in the green, copsy valley at the base of the mountain we
had met with the white-crowned sparrows and Wilson and Audubon
warblers; then, as we began to climb the steep shoulder of the
mountain, the American pipits had become our comrades, accompanying us
about half way up the elevation; now all other birds had disappeared
and we entered the arctic precincts of the leucostictes, which, like a
gallant bodyguard, escorted us to the summit, cheering us on with their
friendly chirping.  The bailiwicks of the pipits and the rosy finches
slightly overlapped, as did also those of the pipits and the
white-crowned sparrows near the great mountain's base.  However, no
pipits ventured to the upper story of this elevated region--at least,
not at the time of our visit, although they may have ascended to the
summit later in the season.

How blithe and cheerful were the pretty leucostictes!  Now they darted
fearlessly about in the air over the summit and the gorges; now they
alighted on the wall of the dilapidated old signal station, and anon
hopped and flitted about over the extensive snow beds, picking up
dainties that were evidently to their taste, all the while beguiling
the time with their companionable, half-musical chirping.  So far as I
observed, they have no real song.  If they have, it is strange that
they did not furnish a sample of their lyrical gifts on so calm and
sweet a summer day in the season of courtship.

What billsome morsels did they find on the snow?  We examined their
white tablecloth and found a number of small beetles and other insects
creeping up through it or crawling around over its surface.  Thus
Nature spreads her banquet everywhere for her feathered children.

One cannot help falling into the speculative mood as one reflects on
these little birds and their remarkable habits.  Why do they, of all
birds, choose the highest mountain peaks for their summer homes?  Might
the cause be physiological?  Are their lungs, muscles, and nervous
systems so constructed as to be adapted to a dry, rare, crisp
atmosphere, which would prove injurious, perhaps fatal, to birds of a
different structural organization?  Who can tell?  At all events, they
live on these towering elevations all summer long, woo their
plainly-clad mates, build their nests, and rear their happy families.

Their nests are set amid the rocks, and are quite bulky, the walls
composed of grasses and the lining consisting of soft feathers.  In
order to procure the grasses required, they must descend at least to
the belt of scant vegetation just below the region of bare rocks and
boulders.  Where they get the downy feathers for the carpet of their
nurseries I have not been able to ascertain.  No nest has yet been
discovered below an elevation of 12,000 feet.  Our little bird may,
indeed, be called a "haunter of the sky."  The height of the breeding
season is in the latter part of July.  The broods having left the
nests, old and young gather in small flocks and range over the peaks
and ridges, feeding on the insects to be found on the fields of snow.

No less interesting are the habits of these birds in winter.  In
October and November most of them descend only to the timber line,
where they remain throughout the winter, save as they are driven down
into the denser forests by the fierce tempests of this arctic region.
What feathered Vikings they are!  They do not even make for themselves
snow huts for protection from the winter storms.  However, a few
descend almost to the base of the foothills, while others--perhaps the
less hardy--seek a blander climate in the northern part of Mexico.

There are in North America four other species of the genus Leucosticte;
the Aleutian, whose habitat is the Aleutian and Prybilof islands and
east as far as the island of Kadiak; the gray-crowned, which breeds in
British America near the Rocky Mountains, comes to Colorado in winter,
and has been taken as far east as western Iowa; the Hepburn, dwelling
chiefly in the mountain ranges of the Pacific coast, breeding mostly in
the far North, and in winter coming as far south and east as Nevada and
Colorado; and, lastly, the black leucosticte, which winters in the
central latitudes in the Rocky Mountains and whose summer range and
breeding home is unknown to men of science.




HAPPENINGS BY THE WAY

If one were to keep on writing monographs of all our interesting avian
species, the books that would result would make a good-sized library.
The few examples that have been given will illustrate what can be done
in this direction with the help of the field glass and the handbook.  A
few chapters will now be given on what might be called "odds and ends
of bird life," and these are written not only for the information they
may impart, but also for the purpose of showing how many interesting
facts can be gathered along the way by the method of bird study
commended in our opening chapter.

The prince of American ornithologists, Dr. Elliott Coues, has somewhere
said that he would travel a long distance to discover a new kind of
bird, or even to ascertain a new fact about a familiar species.  I
would applaud and echo that sentiment, for by all means let us have
bird news that really is news, instead of revamping the familiar facts
again and again, as some amateurish writers do.  While I am not able to
add any new species to science, I have made note of many pleasing
incidents in the bird realm, and these, I venture to hope, may be of
not a little general interest.

[Illustration: Pewee, or Phoebe (missing from book)]

There is the companionable white-breasted nuthatch which goes scudding
up and down the tree trunks with as much ease and aplomb as a fly
gliding over a window-pane.  I have already told you something about
him.  I had long been aware that he wedged grains of corn, sunflower
seeds, and kernels of nuts in the crannies of the bark; but one day he
invented a trick that was a surprise to me.  It occurred at a summer
resort in northern Indiana, where I noticed a nuthatch hitching up and
down and around the slender stem of a sapling, pausing at intervals to
thrust something into the crevices of the bark.  My curiosity led me to
pry into the bird's affairs.  Stepping smartly forward, I drove him
away, not heeding his vigorous protest of "yank, yank," and examined
the bark of the sapling.  What did I discover?  A colony of black ants
were scuttling up and down the tree, apparently under stress of great
excitement; and good reason they had, for here and there one of their
number was tightly wedged into a chink of the bark, often doubled up
into a bow or an angle.  They were not killed, at least not all of
them, for they were still wiggling their legs and antennas; but they
were evidently benumbed, or some of their backs were broken, and they
were fastened so securely in the fissures that they could not escape.
Does it not look as if the forehanded nuthatch was laying by a supply
of ants for a coming time of hunger?

One day a family of wood pewees visited the dooryard of my tent.  A
multitude of gnats circling about in the air, seemed to be precisely to
the taste of the pewee parents and their hungry bairns.  The bantlings
sat chirping in the saplings, or flitted from twig to twig, twinkling
their wings in the coaxing way that is characteristic of young birds,
while the papa and mamma swung out into the air, nabbed the insects on
the wing, and flew back to the trees, describing many circles,
ellipses, and festoons of rare grace and beauty.  The snapping of their
mandibles could often be heard as they closed upon the fated insects.
Most of the gnats thus captured were thrust into the mouths of the
young birds, the parents dashing up to them and feeding them without
alighting.  As lavish a minstrel as the pewee _pater familias_ is under
most circumstances, that morning he was too busy to tune his wind harp.

Speaking of the voracious appetites of birds, as exhibited by the young
pewees, which never seemed to get enough, I am reminded of something I
witnessed one day in a deep, wooded hollow.  A red-eyed vireo suddenly
appeared in the branches above me, holding an immense green worm in his
beak.  Then followed a tussle for the "upper hand" that was worth
seeing.  The bird, holding its squirming victim by one end, proceeded
to beat it against the limb, though it was almost too big and
recalcitrant for him to handle.  Presently the vireo, after a good deal
of effort, succeeded in passing his quarry through his bill from end to
end, thus reducing it to somewhat smaller dimensions.  Still, it was a
large morsel for so small a diner.

However, there were some intimations that the bird intended to bolt the
worm whole.  And that was just what he was planning to do!  What a
struggle ensued!  I would have wagered that the little gourmand had
reckoned without his host when he undertook to swallow that immense
worm.  He twisted his neck this way and that, gulped and squeezed and
pried, until I feared he would burst his throat open.  At length the
worm was partly bolted, but it seemed to stick fast, and the bird stood
there with his mandibles pressed far apart, the end of his dinner
bulging out of his mouth, and I felt uneasy for a time lest he should
choke to death before my very eyes.  But, after resting a minute, he
gave his neck a number of convulsive twists, and at last succeeded in
forcing the unwilling worm down his throat, after which he wiped his
bill on the limb with a self-satisfied air and flitted away as happy as
a lark, knowing that his faithful craw would do the rest.

A slate-colored junco did a pretty thing in the woods one day of early
spring--much more pleasing to see than the incident just described.  He
had rinsed his feathers in a pool of the little stream down in the
hollow, and now he was squatting flat on his belly on the ground in a
soft bed of brown leaves, preening and primping his plumes with his
little white, conical bill.  Now he gave his quills a deft touch, now
the feathers of his wing, now those of his dainty breast.  Lying there
in the sun he presented a perfect picture of feathery laziness.  Many a
bird I have seen arranging his toilet after a bath while perching on a
limb or a twig, and even, as in the case of the brown creeper, while
clinging to the bole of a tree, but never before did I see one doing
this while lolling on the ground.  He was not sick or hurt, simply
lazy; for when I went near him he flew away as chipper as a bird could
be.

The rambler not only sees many of these pretty bird ways, but he
sometimes has a hearty laugh at the birds' expense.  During one of my
outings a blustering whirlwind started on the summit of a small hill
scantily covered with scrub oak.  It seized the dead leaves and twirled
them about as if in a spasm of anger; then it went scurrying noisily
down the steep incline, flinging itself against a couple of large brush
heaps in the hollow where a number of fox and Harris sparrows were
concealed.  They had imagined themselves safe in their brushy covert.
Suddenly the whirlwind struck their hiding place with a clang and
clatter, sending the birds in a wild panic in every direction.  They
did not seem to know what had struck them, and, as the wanton breezes
tossed them this way and that, they expressed their astonishment in
loud and frightened chirping.  All over and no harm done, the bird
lover burst into a peal of laughter at the discomfiture of his
feathered neighbors, who looked at him as if they did not know what to
make of his untimely hilarity.

Then, too, one cannot be an observing rambler without stumbling upon
some exceedingly odd avian pranks, as the following description will
indicate: One day I was sitting on the steep bank of a wooded ravine
watching several rare little birds, hoping to discover some of their
nests.  Presently the susurrus of the hummingbird was heard, and a
moment later two ruby-throats, a male and a female, flashed into view
on the slope below me.  The tiny madam settled on a twig near the
ground, while her ruby-throated spouse performed one of the queerest
antics I have ever witnessed in featherland.  He began to swing back
and forth in an arc of almost half a circle, the diameter of which was
at least twelve feet, just grazing his mate whenever he reached the
lowest point of his concentric movements.  Back and forth he swung at
least a dozen times, looking like a tiny pendulum moving in an immense
arc, and, oddly enough, the segment seemed to be perfectly formed every
time.  Had the bird wheeled entirely around, he would, I feel sure,
have described a circle and not an ellipse.  The movement was
exceedingly swift, and might well have been called the embodiment of
grace.  Suddenly, as the diminutive acrobat reached the highest point
of his arc, he dashed off to the right in a straight line, followed by
his mate, and in a moment both had disappeared.  Whether other
observers have been witnesses of this curious gambol, I am unable to
say.

Have you ever been ill-mannered enough to watch the birds going to bed?
I remember spending an evening in the woods playing the role of Paul
Pry on my feathered neighbors.  The sun was just sinking behind the
bluffs on the other side of a broad river--the Missouri--and the moon,
which was half full, was hanging high in the blue sky.  What were those
two large black objects over yonder in the woods?  My glass soon
revealed their identity--a pair of turkey buzzards perched side by side
on a limb, one of them squatted flat on his belly ready to take his
first nap.  My curiosity led me to go near them, when they spread their
broad, sable wings, flew a few rods, and alighted on another horizontal
bar.  There they sat as long as I could see them in the thickening
darkness, turning their heads now and then to see whether their
ill-bred visitor was still spying upon them.  They made no efforts to
conceal themselves, as the small birds do in roosting, for they knew,
no doubt, that nothing would carry off fowls of their size.

A little later on the same evening a whip-poor-will darted up from the
roadside and flew into the woods a short distance, alighting on a white
flag of good size, so that I could plainly see his dark form in the
moonlight.  Then I was witness of this uncanny bird's table manners,
which were entirely unknown to me and may be to others.  At irregular
intervals he leaped into the air, now in one direction, now in another,
captured an insect, and flew back to the top of the flag.  Some of his
evolutions were quite wonderful, and all of them were the perfection of
grace.  He described all kinds of curves and loops.  On alighting he
uttered a low, hollow chuck suggestive of the sepulchral.  Another
notch had to be cut in the tally-stick of my ornithological journey--I
had learned how the whip-poor-will takes his nocturnal dinner of moths
and beetles, and I felt that there was still such a thing as news to be
gathered in birdland.

Most birds, however, do not take their dinner at night, and therefore
it is easier to watch them at their _table d'hote_.  One day a
red-headed woodpecker was giving a strapping youngster as large as
herself his noonday meal.  She came close to him with a morsel in her
long bill, and, after pounding it awhile against a limb, she thrust it
into the screaming youngling's mouth.  But she had failed to reduce it
to a swallowable size; it stuck in his throat, and, do what he would,
he could not bolt it.  It was so large that he was choking; what should
be done?  The simplest thing you can conceive.  The mother bird reached
over and impatiently jerked the refractory morsel out of her baby's
throat, thumped it vigorously several times against the branch, then
gave it to him again, as much as to say, "Now try it!  I guess you can
manage it this time."  And he did, for down his gullet it went with
very little effort.  Then she went after more provender for his
spacious craw.  Whenever she came with a tidbit, she would first drop
it into a kind of pocket in the bark, and pound it a while to reduce it
to a proper consistency; the while the youngster would sit near and
watch her with hungry eyes, and often scream in his coaxing way and
twinkle his wings, until she was ready to deliver up the tempting
fragment.

Once, after she had given him all she had brought, he still opened his
mouth and whimpered for more.  At this exhibition of gluttony she lost
her patience.  Would he never be satisfied, the great, greedy,
overgrown lubber?  He was simply making a slave and a drudge of her.
She looked at him for a moment with a savage glitter in her dark eyes,
then began to peck him angrily right in the mouth, and drove him
peremptorily backward down the limb.  Mother patience has its
limitations in the bird world as well as elsewhere.

On the same day a bank swallow was feeding her little ones, a half
dozen or so, which were ranged on a willow stem at the margin of the
river.  Every time she flew toward them they set up a vigorous calling
to be fed.  She procured her food by skimming airily over the river and
catching the insects that rose from its surface.  Having nabbed one,
she would dart with it to her little family, and, without alighting,
and scarcely pausing in her swift flight, would thrust it into the
mouth of one of the birdkins.  Thus she fed them one by one until she
had gone the round of the little circle, though sometimes, oddly
enough, she would serve the same infant twice in succession.

The little family, all perched in a row, looked very attractive, and I
was watching them closely most of the time.  Suddenly the mother bird
disappeared, and was gone for several minutes.  I forgot to keep my eye
steadily on the youngsters sitting six in a row, and, to my great
surprise, when she reappeared they had left their perch, which was in
plain sight, and I could not rediscover them for some time.  Finally,
however, I espied them cuddling among some leafy twigs a few feet away,
where the mother resumed her duties of purveyor.  My opinion is that
she had begun to feel uneasy for their safety in the exposed place
where I could see them so plainly, and so, while I was looking
elsewhere, had persuaded them to shift their position.  Now they were
partly screened by the intervening leaves, and she felt that they were
secure.

There can be no doubt that birds have a language which the youngsters
soon come to understand, however simple and inarticulated it may be.
In a shady hollow, one day of early spring, a pair of tufted titmice
were supplying the wants of a family of famishing children, and I
invited myself to the family reunion.  The young birds had left the
nest and were perched in a leafy tree.  Most of the time they kept up a
great clamor for food--or, perhaps, they shrieked merely from force of
habit; but every few minutes one of the parent birds would utter a
shrill, commanding cry, at which all the noisy clamorings of the
youthful family would suddenly cease, and for a few moments perfect
quiet would reign in titmouse town; then the hubbub would begin again,
and continue until another order for perfect silence was given.  So far
as I could see, there was no danger from raptorial foes at hand, but
the little family seemed to be in training against the approach of a
marauder.

It may be a far cry, but from green-robed spring fancy yourself
suddenly flung into the lap of snow-bound winter, to look upon scenes
quite different from the foregoing.  The Frost King had been playing a
good many pranks for a week or two, and once, in a spasm of frigid ill
humor, had jammed the mercury in our thermometers a dozen or more
degrees below zero, and had held it there quite too long for our
comfort.  More than once had he shrieked and blustered and stamped his
feet incontinently, and more than once sent his legions of wind, sleet,
and snow howling through the leafless woods.  Everybody in our central
latitudes knows what an explosive old fellow the Frost King is, and how
fierce and savage he can become let the mood once seize him.

Sometimes, too, by the hour he had ground his ice crystals to powder in
mid-air and hurled them to the earth, covering its surface with a robe
of purest white, thus proving that, with all his rudeness and bluster,
he is an old gentleman of aesthetic tastes.  One evening his mood
became blander, and he dropped his crystals from the sky in large, damp
flakes, which clung tenaciously to the branches and twigs; then during
the night his breath became chilled and froze the snowy cylinders, and
when morning broke the woods were a miracle of loveliness, every leaf
and twig bearing a ridge of gleaming pearls, while the sylvan floor was
pure white.  Soon the sun was shining from an unmarred sky, and the
snow-clad earth smiled back in shimmering recognition.  It was a day
for worship in God's first sanctuary.

Yet it was a day for watching the gambols of the birds, and such
occupation by no means interfered with the spirit of worship.  In the
depths of the woods the white-breasted nuthatches were holding a
friendly interview.  How affectionately they talked to one another in
idioms all their own, saying "Hick! hick!" and "Yank! yank!" and
"Ha-ha! ha-ha! ha-ha!" which may mean anything that is kind and cordial
and confidential.  They were either playing at a game of tag, or were
having a peep-show among the bushes, hiding for a moment in some leafy
cluster, then dashing in pursuit of one another in the most frolicksome
way.  I crept in under the arches of the snow-clad bushes to watch
their caperings more closely, but the birds at once quieted down, and
went about their more prosaic vocation of grub gathering.  They were no
doubt "aching" to frisk about among the snowy bushes, but would not
indulge their playful mood under the eye of a human spectator.

Presently one of them was seen carefully primping his feathers--a
function that I had not previously seen a nuthatch perform.  His plumes
seemed to be really quite damp, and, as there was no water at hand--the
streams being mailed with ice as well as nearly a half mile away--he
must have used a snowbank for his lavatory.  But you ask how he
arranged his toilet.  I had several times seen the little brown creeper
clinging to the vertical wall of a tree and preening his plumes after a
bath, and it was natural to suppose that his congener, the nuthatch,
being also a bird of reptatory habits, would follow the same formula.
But not so!  Instead of clinging to the upright bole of a tree, Master
Nuthatch perched crosswise on a twig like a robin or a chickadee, and
smoothed his ruffled plumes.

After this interesting interview with the nuthatches, I trudged about
in the woods for some time without seeing any birds.  What had become
of my feathered neighbors, my companions in every ramble throughout the
winter?  Had the storm driven them to other climes where bland winds
prevailed?  Oh, no!  See what prudent creatures they were that wintry
day.  At the eastern border of the woods, where the sun shone warmly
and the keen westerly breeze was broken and tempered, my little friends
were found in goodly numbers, well knowing where the Frost King's anger
would be softened.

Here were nuthatches and chickadees in plenty, and also tufted tits,
tree sparrows, juncos, downy woodpeckers, and, to make the complement
as nearly full as possible, a hairy woodpecker drummed and
_chir-r-r-red_, several blue jays complained in the distance, and a
goldfinch swinging overhead threaded the air with festoons of black and
gold.  And here I witnessed a new and pretty antic of a tree sparrow,
which flew over from a cornfield hard by and perched on a dogwood
sapling only a few feet away; then it plunged its beak into the little
snowbank on the twig before it and ate greedily of the snow, some of
the crystals clinging to its mandibles, just as the crumbs adhere to
the lips of a hungry boy.  Had the exclamation not been so much like
slang, I would have cried "Next!"  And there was a "next," as sure as
you live, for the little bird soon flitted to another twig in the same
tree and, reaching up, daintily sipped from the dripping underside of
the branch just above and in front of it.  Its thirst having been
assuaged, it flew over into the adjoining field to resume its winter
feast of seeds and berries.

And what was happening over in the field?  Something worth noting, to
be sure.  A coterie of juncos and tree sparrows were breakfasting on
the seeds of a clump of tall weeds, a few of the little feasters
perched on the swaying stems, while others stood on the snow on the
ground and picked the seeds from the racemes that were bent down by
their burden of crystals.  When I went to the place, I could see the
delicate tracery of their feet on the snow, as if they had been writing
their autographs on an untarnished scroll.  Two tiny footprints at
regular intervals, one a little before the other, and each pair
connected with the next by a slender thread or two traced by the bird's
claws--that is a junco's or a tree sparrow's trail in the snow.

A little later a scattering flock of tree sparrows were skipping about
on the snowy floor of the woods, picking up at quick intervals a
palatable tidbit.  Birds often find edibles on the surface of the snow
when our duller eyes can see nothing but immaculate whiteness.  What
long leaps the little birds took across the snow, which looked like a
marble pavement with fairies dancing upon it!  Near by, on one of the
lower twigs of a thorn bush, a sparrow sat with feathers fluffed up and
wings hanging negligently at his side, as if he were taking a siesta
after a hearty meal of weed seeds and winter berries.  Two of his
companions soon joined him in his noonday rest, the trio making a
pretty picture sitting there within an inch or two of the ground.

It was not very long before a tree sparrow perpetrated another
surprise, proving that this species is not without character, as indeed
no species is.  He leaped to the bole of a sapling, clinging there a
few moments like a chickadee or a wren, while he pecked an appetizing
morsel from the bark; then he dropped down to the snow for a brief
breathing spell, after which he sprang up again to the sapling for a
few more bits, repeating the little performance a number of times.

In the same part of the woods a company of chickadees was flitting
about in the trees, plunging into the little snowbanks on the twigs,
sometimes standing in them up to their white bosoms, and often brushing
a segment to the ground, thus making numerous breaches in the white
drifts.  The racket they made with their scolding and piping might have
been called a musical din.  Deciding to watch them a while, I flung
myself down upon the snow.  This act was the signal for a precious
to-do among the nervous little potherers.  Did any one ever hear or
read of such a performance in all the annals of birdland?  What in the
world did it mean--a man lying flat on the ground out there in the
woods?  I was highly amused at the hurly-burly, and decided to add
still more variety to it.  Suddenly I sprang to my feet with a shout.
Several of the birds dropped, as if shot, into a thorn bush below them,
where they set up a hubbub that would have made on old-time Puritan
laugh, even at the risk of being censured for levity.  By and by they
quieted down, and one of them began to whistle his pretty minor tune
with as much serenity as if he had never been excited in his life.  My
winter outing proved that the Frost King and the hardy birds often go
cheek by jowl, as if they were on terms of the most cordial fraternity.




ODDS AND ENDS

The ornithologist is always interested in noting how the conduct of
birds of the same species differs and agrees in different localities.
In a previous chapter some of the differences between the avifauna of
Ohio and Kansas have been described, but a good deal still remains to
be said, teaching more than one lesson in comparative ornithology.

At the beginning of my studies in the Sunflower state the song sparrows
proposed an enigma for my solution, whether wittingly or unwittingly, I
know not.  In Ohio they were the most lavish singers in the outdoor
chorus, chanting their sweet lays every month in the year, summer or
winter; indeed, their most vigorous recitals were often given in
February and March, when there was dearth of other bird music.

But what about the song sparrows of Kansas?  The first winter and
spring passed, and yet my numerous rambles in their haunts did not
bring to my waiting ear one first-class song sparrow concert.  A few
feeble, half-hearted wisps of melody on days that were especially mild
were the only vocal performances they vouchsafed.  To put it bluntly
and truthfully, I never, during my residence of five and a half years
in Kansas, heard a first-rate song sparrow trill.  Nor is that all.  In
the Buckeye state these birds were disposed to be sociable, often
selecting their dwellings near our suburban homes, visiting our
dooryards, singing their blithe roundels on the ridge of the barn roof
or a post of the garden fence.  Not only so, but their songs were often
heard in some of the principal streets of towns where trees were
abundant.

[Illustration: Song Sparrow]

Quite otherwise was the conduct of their western cousins, which seldom
came to town or even near a human residence in the country, but kept
themselves ensconced in the matted copses in the banks of the Missouri
River or in the deep hollows running back from the broad valley.  In
these sequestered haunts they were quite wary, usually scuttling out of
sight at my approach.  True, in Ohio many individuals also chose
out-of-the-way places for habitats, but even then they were not timid,
for often they would mount to the top of a bush or a sapling in plain
sight and trill sweetly by the hour, with never a quaver of fear.  At
rare intervals a Kansas sparrow would visit the thicket on the vacant
lot near my house, but, my! how shy he was!  And as for singing, he
would only squeak a little score.

Wondering at the reticence of the Kansas sparrows, I wrote to a friend
living in Springfield, Ohio, my former home, and inquired what the song
sparrows were doing in that locality.  His reply was that, as usual,
they had been singing with splendid effect on almost every day after
the middle of February.  What is the reason of this difference between
the eastern and western birds?  They are, according to the
systematists, the same type, and yet they behave so differently.  The
solution of the problem is, after all, quite simple.  In Kansas the
song sparrows are winter residents exclusively, passing farther north
when the breeding season approaches; only at rare intervals does a pair
decide to remain in the state throughout the summer; whereas in the
Buckeye state these birds are permanent residents, remaining throughout
the year, and therefore they feel sufficiently at home to tune their
lyres at all seasons.  On the other hand, being only winter visitors in
Kansas, they do not seem to be able to overcome their shyness; either
that, or their wind harps are out of tune.  As a matter of fact,
migrating birds seldom sing a great deal in their winter homes, their
best lyrical efforts being husbanded for their breeding haunts.  I once
spent part of the month of June in Minnesota, almost directly north of
my Kansas field of research, and there found these charming minstrels
as tuneful and affable as the most exacting bird lover could wish.
Perhaps some of the very sparrows that spend the winter in silence in
northeastern Kansas trill their finest arias in their summer homes on
the shores of Lake Minnetonka or in the boggy hollows in the
neighborhood of Duluth.

When I first began to plan for moving back to Ohio, I was foolish
enough to fear that the song sparrows of that state might have changed
their habits during the years of my absence, and that I should be
disappointed in them: but no need of borrowing trouble on their
account, for they were the same blithe and familiar birds, trilling
their sweetest chansons in the trees in the residence portion of the
town in which I lived.  And sing!  Were there ever birds with more
dulcet tones, with finer voice register, or with a greater variety of
tunes in their repertoire?

Going back to Kansas in winter, we note that the song sparrows, instead
of remaining at one place, shifted about a good deal more than I had
ever known them to do in the East.  In December a pair found a dwelling
in the weed clumps and brush heaps of a hollow a short distance from
the Missouri River; but they soon deserted this spot, well sheltered as
it was, none being seen there until the twenty-third of February.  It
surprised me to find another pair, and sometimes two pairs, in a
thicket right on the bank of the wide river, where they were exposed to
many of the winter blasts, especially those that swept down from the
frozen north.  Up in the deep, winding ravine they might have had
excellent shelter and, so far as I could see, just as good feeding.
However, I have long ago learned that there is no accounting for tastes
in the bird realm any more than in the human realm.

The hardiest of the _Mniotiltidae_ tribe are the myrtle warblers, which
dapple the whitened edges of winter, both autumn and spring, with their
golden rumps and amber brooches.  Evidently these birds are shyer of
the rigorous Ohio winters than of the more mild-mannered Kansas
weather.  In the former state I never saw a myrtle warbler after the
first or second week in November, while in Kansas I came upon a flock
of them in a wooded hollow by the river on the eighth of December,
1897, and then after a severe snowstorm had swept over the region from
the western prairies.  It seemed odd to find these dainty featherland
blossoms when the whole country was covered with an ermine of snow.

Then they disappeared, and I did not expect to see them again until the
next spring; but on the fourteenth of February, which was a warm,
vernal day thrust into the midst of winter, a flock of perhaps a dozen
were flitting and chirping among the trees in the suburbs of the city,
their hoarse little _chep_, always giving one the impression that the
birds have taken a cold which has affected their vocal cords, sounding
as familiar as of old.  However, that very evening at dusk a black
cloud, charged with electricity and bellowing with anger, came up out
of the west like a young Lochinvar, and hurled a fierce storm across
the hills and valleys, and the next day not a myrtle warbler was to be
seen in all the countryside, though I tramped weary miles in search of
them.  The tempest had doubtless frightened them away to the suaver
southland, from which they did not return until the following spring.

One of my most pleasing observations was made on December 19, 1902.
There had been a number of days of severe weather, accompanied by hard
storms.  Six inches of snow lay on the ground.  Now the storm had spent
its force, the sun was shining genially, and the snow was melting.
Warm as it was, I was greatly surprised to find a flock of myrtle
warblers in the woods so late in the season.  They had braved the
storms of the preceding week, and were as chipper and active as myrtle
warblers could be.  But their employment was a still greater surprise.
They were darting about in the air among the treetops, as well as amid
the bushes in the deep ravine, catching insects on the wing.  That
insects should be flying after the wintry weather of the previous week
was still more surprising than that the warblers should be here to dine
upon them.  Soon after that day, however, the little yellow-rumps must
have taken the wing route to a more genial climate, for they were seen
no more that winter.

Of a more permanent character was the residence of the jolly juncos,
which dwelt all winter in northeastern Kansas, let the weather be never
so lowering.  Always active and alert, flitting from bush to weed, and
from the snow-carpeted ground to the gnarled oak saplings, now
pilfering a dinner of wild berries and now a luncheon of weed seeds,
they seemed to generate enough warmth in their trig little bodies to
defy old Boreas to do his best.  Water flowing from melting snow must
be ice-cold, yet the juncos plunged into the crystal pools and rinsed
their plumes with as much apparent relish as if their lavatory were
tepid instead of icy, and as if balmy instead of nipping winds were
blowing.

One day I watched a member of this family taking his dinner of wild
grapes.  Finding a dark red cluster, he would pick off the juiciest
berry he could reach, press it daintily between his white mandibles for
a few moments, swallow a part of the pulp, and drop the rest to the
ground.  What part of the grape did he eat?  That is the precise
problem I could not solve with certainty, for on examining the rejected
portions that had been flung to the ground I found that one seed still
remained, together with part of the pulp and all of the broken rind.  I
half suspect, though, that Master Junco likes to tipple a little--never
enough, however, be it remembered, to make him reel or lose his senses.
No! no! a toper Master Junco is not; he is too sane a bird for that!
Would that all the citizens of our republic would display as much sound
judgment and self-control.

Where all the birds sleep on biting winter nights it would be difficult
to say, but the acute little juncos lease the farmer's corn shocks hard
by the woods.  At dusk you may startle a dozen of them from a single
shock.  They dart pellmell from their hiding places, chippering their
protest, and when you examine the shock you find cozy nooks and ingles
among the leaves and stalks, where they find couches and at the same
time coverts from the sharp winds.  As you stand at the border of the
woods in the gloaming you can hear the rustling of the fodder as the
juncos move about in their tepees, trying to find the choicest and
snuggest berths.  Usually they select the tops of the standing shocks,
perhaps for safety; yet some may be found also in the shocks that have
partly fallen to the ground.

In the latter part of February the juncos began to rehearse their
spring songs, which were a welcome sound in the almost unbroken silence
of the winter.  The nearer the spring approached, the higher they
mounted in the trees, and the more prolonged was their flight, as if
they were practicing their wing exercises to inure their muscles to the
strain that would be put upon them when they undertook their long
journey to their northern summer homes; for, of course, the juncos do
not breed in our central latitudes, but hie to the northern part of the
United States and the Dominion of Canada.

In Ohio the brown creepers and the golden-crowned kinglets were
constant winter companions in the woods; but, although Kansas is
considerably farther south, they do not seem to be winter residents
there--at least, not in the northeastern part of the state--the only
exception being that in January, 1903, several creepers were observed
in my yard.  One may well wonder why these birds are winter residents
in Ohio and only migrants in a latitude that is two degrees farther
south.

There was some scant compensation in the presence of the winter wren
one winter in the Sunflower state.  The fourteenth of December brought
one of these brown Lilliputians to a deep hollow in town, where he
chattered petulantly and scampered along an old paling fence.  No more
winter wrens were seen until January seventh, when one darted out of
some bushes on the bank of a stream about two miles south of town.  My
next jaunt to this hollow took place on the twenty-seventh, when, to my
surprise, a hermit thrush was seen in a clump of bushes and saplings--a
bird that I supposed had been sunning himself for at least a month in
the genial South.  While tramping about trying to get another view of
the unconventional thrush, I frightened a winter wren from a cluster of
weeds and bushes.  My! how alarmed he was!  Uttering a loud chirp, he
darted down to the center of the stream and slipped into a little cave
formed by ice and snow frozen over a clump of low bushes.  There he hid
himself like an Eskimo in his snow hut.  My trudging near by frightened
the bird out of the farther doorway, and he dashed away pellmell,
hurling a saucy gird of protestation at me, and was seen by me no more.
I examined the little snow house.  It was very cunning indeed, and
might well have made a cozy shelter for the little wren in stormy
weather.  My next meeting with a winter wren occurred on the fifteenth
of February, in the same hollow, but about an eighth of a mile nearer
the river.  A query arises here: Did I see four different winter wrens
during the winter, or only one in four different localities?  Who can
tell?

That is not all about the winter wrens.  My first winter in Kansas was
the severest I experienced in that state; yet it was the only winter of
the five I spent in Kansas that brought me the winter wren.  If it
would do any good, one might ask again the question why.  Although the
winter wren is a migrant in Ohio, as he is for the most part in
northeastern Kansas, yet I never heard his song in the former state,
while in the latter I was fortunate enough to listen to his tinkling
melody three times the first spring I spent there.  After that I never
heard him, and indeed saw him only a few times.  But the sweet, silvery
roulade--could there be anything more charming in the world of outdoor
music?

My winter rambles--and winter is almost as good a time for bird study
as summer--enabled me to note some variety of temperament in the avian
realm.  One thing we soon learn in our winter outings: Few birds are
recluses.  No, they are sociable creatures, living in what might be
called nomadic communities.  In the spring-time, during the mating
season, they pair off and become more or less exclusive and secretive,
keeping close to the precincts they have selected; but in winter they
grow more neighborly, and move about in the woods or over the fields in
flocks of various sizes.

The woodland flocks usually consist of a number of species all of which
seem to be on the most cordial terms, having, no doubt, a community
of interest.  As we quietly pursue our way in this wooded vale,
we see no birds for some distance.  Presently a fine, protesting
"chick-a-dee-dee! chick-a-dee-dee!" breaks the silence.  It is the
warning call of the tomtit or chickadee, which we soon espy tilting
about on his trapeze of twigs in the trees or bushes.  But you may
depend upon it he is not alone; he is only a part of the rim of a
feathered colony dwelling near at hand, and consisting, very likely, of
tufted titmice, white-breasted nuthatches, juncos, tree sparrows, blue
jays, one or two downy woodpeckers, a pair of cardinals, a flicker or
two, and a cackling red-breasted woodpecker.  There may be even a song
sparrow in the company and a couple of brown creepers, and possibly a
flock of purple finches, chirping cheerily in the tops of the trees.

While, in the spring and summer, birds are to be found in nearly every
part of the woods, never many at one place, the opposite condition
prevails in the winter.  Sometimes you may walk almost a half mile
without seeing or hearing a single bird; then you suddenly come upon a
good-sized company of them, somewhat scattered, it is true, but within
easy hailing distance.  Nor do they always remain in the same
localities, but move about, now here, now there, like nomads looking
for the best foraging places.  For instance, on the first of January,
after leaving the city, I saw not a bird until I reached a pleasant
sylvan hollow at least a half mile away.  Here a merry crowd greeted
the pedestrian.  It was composed of all the birds I have just named,
with flocks of bluebirds and goldfinches thrown in for good measure.
On the fourteenth of January a company--either the same or another--was
found in a small copsy hollow only a quarter of a mile from the city,
while the spot previously occupied was deserted.  It is pleasant to
think of these feathered troopers roaming about the country in search
of Nature's choicest storehouses.  The code that obtains in these
movable birdvilles is this, as near as I am able to analyze it: Each
one for himself, and yet all for one another.

The familiar adage, "Birds of a feather flock together," is not always
true, for in winter birds of many a feather often flock together.  It
may be asked, Why?  No doubt largely for social ends.  Nothing is more
evident to the observer than that most birds love company, and a good
deal of it.  Their genial conversation among themselves as they pursue
their work and play fully proves that.  Another object is undoubtedly
protection.  Birds have enemies, many of them, and when the woods are
bare there is little chance for hiding, and so they must be especially
on the alert.  Let a hawk come gliding silently and slyly down the
vale, and before he gets too near some keen little eye espies him, the
alarm is sounded, and the whole company scurries into the thickets or
trees for safety.  The chickadees and titmice seem to be a sort of
sentry for the company.

A large part of the time in birdland is spent in solving the
"bread-and-butter" problem.  And how do our feathered citizens solve
this important problem in the cold weather?  Nature has spread many a
banquet for her avian children, although they must usually rustle for
their food just as we must in the human world.  The nuthatches,
titmice, woodpeckers, and brown creepers find larvae, grubs, borers,
and insects' eggs in the crannies of the bark and other nooks and
niches; the goldfinches find something to their taste in the buds of
the trees and also make many a meal of thistle and sunflower seeds; the
juncos and tree sparrows, forming a joint stock company in winter,
rifle all kinds of weeds of their seedy treasures; the blue jays lunch
on acorns and berries when they cannot find enough juicy grubs to
satisfy their appetites, and so on through the whole list.

By playing the spy on the birds we may learn much about their dietary
habits.  It is the first of January, and we are in a wooded hollow.
There is a tufted titmouse; now he flits to the ground, picks up a
tidbit, darts up to a twig, places his morsel under his claws, and
proceeds to peck it to pieces.  Our binocular shows that it is
something yellow, but we cannot make out what it is.  As we draw near,
the bird seizes the fragment with his bill--perhaps he fears we will
filch it from him--and flits about among the bushes on the steep bank,
looking for a place to stow his "goody."  Presently he pushes it into a
crevice of the bark, hammers it tightly into place, and darts away with
a merry chirp.  We go to the spot and find that his hidden treasure is
a grain of corn which he has purloined from the farmer's field on the
slope.  A few minutes later another tit--or the same one--slyly thrusts
a morsel in among some leaves and twigs on the bank, even pulling the
leaves down over it for a screen.  It turns out to be a small acorn.
That is one of Master Tit's ways--storing away provisions for a time of
need.  With his stout, conical beak he is able to break the shell of an
acorn, peck a corn grain into swallowable bits, and tear open the
toughest casing of a cocoon.  He will even break the hard pits of the
dogwood berry to secure the kernel within, the ground below often being
strewn with the shell fragments.  No danger of _Parus bicolor_ coming
to want or going to the poorhouse.

Another day the juncos are feeding on the seeds of the foxtail or
pigeon grass, in an old orchard hard by the border of the woods.
Sometimes they will make a dinner of berries--the kinds too that are
regarded as poisonous to man--eating the juicy pulp in their dainty
way, and dropping the seeds and rind to the ground.  In the ravine
furrowed out by a stream--this is down in one of the hollows--there is
a perfect network of bird tracks in the snow beneath a clump of weed
stalks.  How dainty they are, like tiny chains, twisted and coiled
about on the white surface!  They were made by the juncos and tree
sparrows, and on examining the seed pods and clusters above the bank we
note that they are torn and ragged.  The feathered banqueters have been
here, and while they were industriously culling the pods, some of the
seeds fell to the white carpet below, and these have been carefully
picked up by the birds, as we see, so that nothing should be wasted.

It is not often you catch a bird in the singing mood in the winter; yet
on December 19, a purple finch was piping quite a vivacious tune in the
woods.  Of course, he was not in his best voice, but his performance
was good enough to entitle it to the name of bird music.  The finches,
by the way, are strong flyers.  At your approach, instead of flitting
off a little way, perhaps to the next tree or bush, after the manner of
the tits and nuthatches and many other birds, the finches tarry in the
tree-tops as long as they deem it safe, then take to wing and fly to a
distant part of the woods, and you may not see them again that day.
However, they may come back to you after a while, as if they relished
your company.  The goldfinches are also long-distance flyers, not
flitters.  Usually they give some signal of their presence, either by
their vivacious "pe-chick-o-pe" or their childlike and semi-musical
calls; but there are times when a good-sized flock of them will
suddenly appear in the tree-tops above you, and you cannot tell when
they arrived, for you did not see them there at all a few minutes
before.




WAYSIDE OBSERVATIONS

The previous chapter closed with some notes on the behavior of birds in
the winter time.  My home rambling grounds in northeastern Kansas were
extremely undulating, cut up into ridges and ravines, most of which
were covered with a thick growth of weeds, bushes, and timber.  In some
places the thickets were so dense as to be almost impenetrable.  This
diversity in the topography of the country afforded considerable
variety in the faunal life of the region.

For example, in bitter winter weather most of the birds would hug the
sheltered hollows, where they found coverts in the copses, and would
avoid the hilltops, which were exposed to the nipping winds blowing
from the western prairies.  As the spring approached, bringing blander
weather, they gradually moved up the hillsides, many of them finding
billsome seeds and berries on the summits.

However, note a difference in the temperament of individuals of the
same species.  On the bitterest days of winter I would sometimes leave
the sheltered hollows and lowlands and clamber to the summits of the
wind-swept hills, and, oddly enough, on the exposed heights I
occasionally flushed a solitary bird, which would spring up from the
weeds or copses and dart away with a frightened cry.  More than likely
it would be an individual of the same species as some of the more
socially disposed tenants of the lower grounds, but for some reason,
what, I know not, it preferred the life of an anchorite; it did not
care for society, even of its own kith.  Invariably, too, these
feathered recluses were extremely shy, scuttling away like frightened
deer as I approached their cloistered haunts.

These notes stir several queries in one's mind.  Is there such a thing
as social ostracism in the bird world?  Might these hilltop eremites
have committed some crime or some breach of decorum that effected their
banishment from respectable avicular society?  Or were they simply of a
sullen or retiring disposition, choosing seclusion rather than the
company of their kind?  These questions must be left unanswered.  Most
frequently the lone bird would be a song sparrow.  Once a brilliant
cardinal was trying to conceal himself in a clump of bushes and weeds
far up the hillside, acting very much like a social outcast.  For some
reason that he did not see fit to explain he wanted to be alone.

If the song sparrows of eastern Kansas belie their name and seldom fall
into the lyrical mood, as has been said, the like cannot be said of the
robins, which, in the proper season, were very lavish of their
minstrelsy.  Their favorite singing time in the West, as in the East,
was at the "peep of dawn."  How often their ringing carols broke into
my early morning dreams!

Have you ever noticed the tentative efforts of the robins in the early
spring, at the beginning of the song season, before they get their
harps in full tune?  It is interesting and amusing to listen to their
rehearsals, of which they need quite a number before they acquire full
control of their voices.  This is the method: Starting off on a tune,
they will keep it up until their voices break; then they will stop a
while to recover breath, and presently make another attempt with
perhaps slightly better success.  At first they are able to pipe only a
syllable or two before their voices break.  After a while they succeed
in carrying the tune for a respectable little run, but sooner or later
their voices will go all to pieces or slide up into a falsetto, making
another pause necessary.  By and by, however, after much practice, they
gain perfect vocal control, and are able to sustain their songs for a
long time without a mishap.  When the voice of the rehearsing bird
breaks, it apparently runs too high in the scale for the bird's
register, just as the voice of a sixteen-year-old boy is apt to do, to
his own confusion and the amusement of his friends.

[Illustration: Cardinal]

Another fact about robin music may be of interest to those who have not
observed it.  In the early spring these birds are extremely lyrical,
that being their season of courtship; then will follow a few weeks of
comparative silence--the time when there are little ones in need of
parental care.  At this period the husbands, it would seem, are either
too busy or too wary to sing a great deal.  But now note: When the
youngsters have flown from the nest and are able to take care of
themselves, the silence in robindom is again broken, and there is a
flood-tide of melody from early morning till eventide.  The second
lyrical period lasts until another nest has been built and another
clutch of eggs has been hatched, when the choralists again relapse into
comparative silence.

Since coming back to Ohio, I imagine that the eastern robins are better
singers than their western relatives.  Their voices, to my ear, are
clearer and more ringing, less apt to break into a squeak at the top of
their register, and there is more variety of expression as well as
greater facility in managing the technique.  I think this is not all
fancy, yet I would not speak with the assurance of the dogmatist.

In the good Jayhawker state the orchard orioles are more abundant than
they are in the eastern and northeastern part of the state of Ohio.
Indeed, the range of this species is more southerly than that of their
congeners, the Baltimore orioles.  In their proper latitude no birds,
or at least few of them, are more lavish of their melody than the
orchard orioles.  What a ringing voice the oriole possesses!  His song
has a saucy note of challenge running through it, and also a human
intonation that makes it rarely attractive.  All day long the male
sings his cheery solos, scarcely pausing for breath or food, now
sitting on the topmost twig of a dead apple tree in the orchard, now
amid the screening foliage of a maple in the yard, and anon on the
other side of the street in a stately cottonwood.  But where is that
modest little personage, his wife?  She is seldom heard, and almost as
seldom seen.  It is really remarkable--her gift of concealment.  When
she builds her nest is a mystery.  It is often so deftly hidden that
you would not be likely to find it in a long hunt.  In the spring of
1898 a pair of orchard orioles took up their residence in the trees
about my house, the male singing his brisk overtures, the female seen
only at flitting intervals and never heard.  Watch as I would, I could
not surprise her laying the timbers of her cottage, which I felt sure
was being built somewhere in the trees.  Indeed, I did not discover it
until autumn came, long after the orioles, old and young, had taken
flight to a balmier clime, and the trees were stripped of their leaves,
when, lo! it appeared in plain view on one of the trees on the opposite
side of the street, the very place where I had not thought of looking
for it.

The Baltimore orioles as a rule are not so secretive; yet during the
summer of 1898 a pair of these firebirds led me a fruitless chase.
Their secret was not divulged until the leaves had fallen the next
autumn, when there the nest hung in the midst of a tall cottonwood in
my back yard close to the house.  Lord Baltimore and his mate usually
suspend their nests on the outer branches of the trees, where they are
not hard to discover, but this pair did not follow the common formula,
for the nest was placed in the thickest part of the foliage, so that it
was impossible to see it from the ground until the branches were bare.

Of all the malaperts of birddom none excel and few equal the white-eyed
vireo for volubility and downright audacity.  All his songs--and he has
quite a respectable list of them--seem to be either a protest or a
challenge; a protest against your intrusion into his precincts, a
challenge to find him and his nest if you can.  Again and again in
Kansas I crept into their bushy coverts just for the purpose of
receiving a sound scolding.  Such a berating did they give me, telling
me of all my faults and foibles, that I certainly ought to remain
humble all the rest of my days.  A half dozen viragoes could not have
done better--that is, worse.  They would flit about in the bushes above
my head, their little white eyes gleaming with fire, and call me all
the names they could lay their tongues to.  I wonder whether the
white-eyes have a dictionary of epithets.  Nature has done an odd thing
in making the white-eyed vireo.

Their nests are not easy to find, although they do not always make a
great deal of effort at concealment.  Like all the vireo tribe, they
suspend their tiny baskets from the fork or crotch of a horizontal
twig.  The nest is somewhat bulkier than the compact little cup of the
red-eyed vireo, and is apt to be more carefully concealed in the
foliage, although I have found more than one nest that was hung in
plain sight.  I remember one in particular.  It was dangling from the
outer twigs of a small bush by the side of the woodland path which I
was pursuing.  In fact, it could be distinctly seen from the path.  In
spite of the mother's pleadings, protests, and objurgations, I stepped
over to inspect her pendant domicile, whose holdings were four baby
white-eyes, their eyelids still glued together.  As the twigs stirred,
they opened their mouths for food, and I decided to accommodate them.
Taking a bit of cracker from my haversack, I moistened it, and rolled
it into a pellet between my finger and thumb; then, gently swaying the
bushes, I induced the bantlings to open their mouths, when I dropped
the morsel into one of the tiny throats.  You ought to have seen the
wry face baby made as it gulped down the new kind of food, which had
such an odd taste.  It was plain that the callow nestling was able to
distinguish this morsel from the palatable diet it had been accustomed
to.  Possibly it suffered from a temporary fit of indigestion, but no
permanent harm was done by my experiment, for when I called on them
again a few days later, the birdkins four were safe and well, their
eyes open, and their instincts sufficiently developed to cause them to
cuddle low in their basket instead of opening their mouths.

[Illustration: White-eyed Vireo]

The rambler who would hear a real outdoor concert should rise early,
swallow a few bits of cracker and a cup of coffee, and seek some
bird-haunted hollow or woodland just as day begins to break.  One
morning I pursued this plan, and was more than compensated for the loss
of an hour or two of sleep.  Just as the east began to blush I found
myself in a favorite wooded hollow.

What a _potpourri_ of bird song greeted my ear!  How many choralists
took part in the matutinal concert I cannot say, but there were scores
of them.  The volume of song would sometimes swell to a full-toned
orchestra, and then for a few moments it would sink almost to a lull,
all of it like the flow and ebb of the tides of a sea of melody.  It
was interesting to note how several voices would sometimes run into a
chime when they struck the same chord.

Let me call the roll of the members of that feathered choir.  First,
and most gifted of all, were a couple of brown thrashers, whose tones
were as strong and sweet as those of a silver cornet, making the echoes
ring across the hollow.  I have listened to many a thrasher song in the
North, the South, and the West, but have never heard a voice of better
timbre than that of one of the tawny vocalists singing that morning, as
he sat on the topmost twig of an oak tree and flung out his medley upon
the morning air.  It is wonderful, anyway, with what an ecstasy the
thrasher will sometimes sing.  Nothing could be plainer than that he
sings for the pure pleasure of it--an artist deeply in love with his
art.

Falling a little behind the thrashers in vocal power and technical
execution were the catbirds, which sent up their cavatinas from the
bushes in the hollow.  Their voices lacked the volume and strength of
their rivals, yet some of their strains were truly the quintessence of
sweetness.

Conspicuous members of the early chorus were the wood thrushes, a dozen
or more of which were often singing at the same time.  From every part
of the woods their peals arose.  Of course, there was no attempt--at
least, so far as I could discover--to sing in concert, but each
minstrel followed his own sweet will, and so the combined result was
not what you would call a harmony, but a medley, albeit a very pleasing
one.  If the wood thrush's execution were less labored, he would
certainly be a marvelous songster, and even as it is, he furnishes
unending delight to those whose ears are trained to appreciate avian
minstrelsy.

Two or three rose-breasted grossbeaks piped their liquid, childlike
arias; towhees, at least a half-dozen of them, flung forth their loud,
explosive trills that have a real musical quality; several cardinals
whistled as if they meant to drown out all the other voices; scarlet
and summer tanagers drawled their good-natured tunes, while their rich
robes gleamed in the level rays of the rising sun; running like silver
threads through all the other music, could be heard the fine trills of
the field sparrows; the swinging chant of the creeping warblers and the
loud rattle of the Tennessee warblers ran high up in the scale,
furnishing a gossamer tenor; that golden optimist, the Baltimore
oriole, piped his cheery recitative in the tops of the trees;
chickadees supplied the minor strains and tufted titmice the alto; four
or five turtle doves soothed the ear with their meditative cooing;
while the calls and songs of numerous jays and a few yellow-breasted
chats made a kind of trombone accompaniment.  Surely it is worth one's
while to hie early to the haunts of the birds to hear such a tumult of
song.

One spring I made up my mind to make a closer study than ever of the
dainty creeping warbler, wishing to know just how he contrives to
scuttle up and down the boles and branches of the trees with so much
ease and grace.  He is the only warbler we have in eastern North
America that makes a habit of scaling the tree trunks and descending
them head downward.  How does he do this?  The muscles of his legs and
pelvis are as elastic as India rubber, so that he can twist and twirl
about in a marvelous way, pointing his head one moment to the east and
the next, without losing his hold, in the opposite direction.  He is
able to swing himself around almost as if he were hung on a pivot.

But how does he hold himself on his shaggy wall as he hitches head
downward?  Just as the nuthatch does--not by keeping both feet directly
under him, as most people suppose, but by thrusting one foot slightly
forward and the other outward and backward, thus preserving his balance
at the same time that he holds himself firmly with his sharp little
claws to his upright wall.  Some of the pictures of the creeper seen in
the books are not quite true to creeper methods of clinging and
locomotion, for they represent him as stuck to the bark of a tree trunk
with both feet invisible, presumably held directly under his striped
breast.  In the real position it is likely that one or both feet could
be seen, the one thrust forward and the other flung back and to one
side.  At least one foot would be visible, whatever the angle at which
the bird would be inspected, and from many points of view both of his
tiny feet may be plainly seen in the position described.

Our little striped friend, usually called in the books the
black-and-white warbler, is not, after all, so expert a creeper as is
the nuthatch, which may be called the arboreal skater _par excellence_.
The warbler does not go scuttling straight down a vertical bole or
branch as the nuthatch does, but swings his lithe body from side to
side, as if he did not loosen the hold of both feet simultaneously but
alternately.  Besides, both in ascending and descending he must have
more frequent recourse to his wings to tide him over the difficult
places.  While the nuthatch can glide over the smoothest and hardest
bark, and even descend the wall of a brick house, his sharp claws
taking a firm grip on the edges of the bricks, the warbler is not quite
so much of a gymnast, for when he strikes a difficult spot in his
promenade ground, he flies or flits over it to the next protuberance
which his claws can hold.  He has a decided advantage, however, over
all his warbler kin, for he is not only gifted with the creeping
talent, but is also just as dexterous as they in perching on a
horizontal twig.

The little bird known as the brown creeper belongs to a different
avicular family entirely, but in one respect he is like the
black-and-white warbler--that is, he scales the trunks and branches of
the trees.  There, however, the resemblance ceases, for the creeper
rarely goes head downward, evidently thinking that the proper position
for a bird's head is pointing toward the sky, not toward the ground.
Besides, he seldom, if ever, sits crosswise on a perch; no, he is an
inveterate creeper.  My study of him proves that he does not hold his
feet directly under his breast, but spreads them out well toward either
side, knowing instinctively how to make a broad enough base to enable
him to preserve his center of gravity.

Like the woodpecker, he uses his stiff tail as a brace; nor does he go
zigzagging up his wall after the manner of the creeping warbler, but
hitches along in a direct line--unless, of course, a tidbit attracts
him to one side--proving that he is a true creeper, one to the manner
born.  However, the warbler has one advantage--he is able to perch with
perfect security on a twig, an accomplishment that has not yet been
attained by his little brown cousin.  How cunningly the creeper peeps
into the crannies of the bark as he plies his trade, thrusts his long,
curved beak into the tiny holes and crevices, and draws out a worm or a
grub, which the next moment goes twinkling down his throat!  His
economic value to the farmer and the fruit grower cannot be estimated,
and he should never be destroyed.

The conduct of different birds is not alike upon their arrival from the
South at their summer nesting haunts in our more northern latitudes;
some heralding their advent with jubilant song as if in greeting to the
familiar scenes, while others are silent and wary.  The first I knew of
the Baltimore and orchard orioles last spring, they were singing
blithely in the trees about the house; but the brown thrashers flitted
about slyly and silently for a few days, apparently to make sure that
the coast was clear of danger; having done which, they burst into their
dithyrambs with a will.  Out in the woodland the gorgeous scarlet
tanager announced his arrival one morning with a lively sonnet, which
was heard long before the singer was seen; whereas his cousin, the
summer tanager, uttered only his quaint alarm-call, "Chip-burn,
chip-burn," and was excessively shy, dashing wildly away as I
approached, unwilling to vouchsafe a wisp of song.  Once he even
pounced angrily upon his black-winged relative and drove him to the
other side of the hollow, precisely as if he meant to say, "Your
singing is out of place, sir, and dangerous, too!  Don't you know that
the man prowling about yonder will shoot little birds who betray their
presence by singing?"

[Illustration: Baltimore Oriole]

One of our most lavish singers all summer long is the indigo bunting;
yet when he first came back from the South he was very shy, and his
voice seemed to be out of tune, so that, even when he tried to sing,
which was seldom, his effort sounded like the creaking of a rusty
door-hinge.  Afterwards, however, when he got the cobwebs out of his
larynx, he made up for all his previous silence.  Quite different is
the habit of the towhee, which announces his presence by his loud,
explosive trill--all too brief--or his complaining "chewing."

Sometimes the rambler and bird gazer meets with other than avian
"specimens" in his excursions.  One evening I was loitering in a
distant hollow, ogling with my field glass several lark sparrows that
were flitting about on the ground in an adjacent patch of some kind.
The birds were singing as only these beautiful sparrows can, and the
quiet of the evening lent an idyllic charm to their rich and varied
chansons.  On the other side of a small stream stood a shanty, in the
door of which sat an old negro woman.  In looking at the birds, I
sometimes turned the glass toward the shanty, although too intent on my
studies to notice it.  Presently the woman could no longer endure my
apparent espionage, and so she said: "Go 'bout yer own business,
mister, 'n' don' ye be spyin' inter my house!"




TROUBLE AMONG THE BIRDS*

*The larger part of this chapter was first published in "The Christian
Endeavor World," Boston; the rest of it in "Our Animal Friends," New
York.  I reprint it here by permission of both these journals.


Even at the risk of causing a feeling of dejection on the reader's
part, I am going to put one "trouble" chapter into this volume.  There
are trials in the birds' domain, and perhaps you and I will feel more
sympathy with them, and will be led to protect them all the more
carefully, if we know something about the "deep waters of affliction"
through which they are sometimes compelled to pass.  Our native
American birds, at least some of them, suffer a good deal at the hands,
so to speak, of the pestiferous English sparrows, which were introduced
into this country by some egregious blunder.

There can be no doubt that the English sparrows are regular bullies.
They do not fight other birds so much as they hector them, making life
intolerable by their ribaldry, coarse jests, and prying manners.  Some
birds, especially many of our beautiful native species, are sensitively
organized, and cannot endure such boorish society as the badly bred
foreigners furnish.  That as much as anything has driven our genteel
bluebirds away from our homes into the woods and other out-of-the-way
places.  How would you feel, my friend, if, as you were going along the
street, a lot of hoodlums should take to gibing and hooting at you?

Were there ever such pesky, ill-mannered citizens as the English
sparrows?  Here comes a downy woodpecker, or a cardinal, or a
rose-breasted grosbeak to town, flitting about the trees of my yard,
gathering goodies among the leaves and twigs, and perhaps piping a
little aria at intervals, congratulating himself on having found a
pleasant, quiet place, when, lo! a gang of English sparrows crowd
around him, peering at him now with one eye, now with the other,
canting their heads in their impertinent way, bowing and scraping and
blinking, and for all the world seeming to make such derisive remarks
as, "Oh, what a fine fellow!  Quite stuck-up, ain't he?  Isn't that a
stylish topknot, though?  He! he! he!  Look! he wears a rose on his
shirt bosom!  Isn't he a dandy?  Ge! ge! gah! gah!" By and by the
visitor can stand the racket and the mockery no longer; and so he
steals away, resolved never again to go to that place to be insulted.
I have repeatedly been witness of just such occurrences.

Early in the spring a robin began to build her nest in the middle story
of one of my maple trees.  The whole process was narrowly watched by
the noisy, hectoring sparrows.  They gathered about her, prying and
bobbing and jostling and chirping, staring at her like a lot of
bumpkins when she leaped into the half-finished cup and molded her
building material with her ruddy bosom.  They seemed to be saying
jeeringly: "Isn't that a funny way for a bird to build a house?  Hay!
hay! hay!"  The robin forsook her nest; and the sparrows borrowed her
timbers for their own nest, and forgot to bring them back again.

Just a moment ago a couple of young red-headed woodpeckers and their
parents visited the trees of my yard, making a lively din, for the
youngsters were calling for their supper.  Then the sparrows crowded
about them, called and jested, followed them from tree to tree, never
stopping their persecutions until the red-headed family flew off in
disgust.

In a Kansas town one March day, as I was returning to the house in
which I was lodging, my attention was attracted to a black-capped
chickadee, which was flitting about and calling in an agitated way in
one of the trees.  Two English sparrows, a cock and his mate, were
responsible for the little bird's perturbation.  What were they doing?
Something rude, as usual.  Perched on a couple of twigs, they were
bending over, stretching out their necks and peering into a small hole
in one of the larger branches.  The male was especially offensive,
standing there and staring into the cavity, and making insolent remarks.

A good-sized club, hurled by myself, sent the sparrows to other parts.
Then I hurried into the house and sat by the curtained window to watch.
With much ado, the little black-cap flew over to the limb with the
cavity.  He flitted about a few moments, then darted to the opening and
looked in, chirping in a reassuring tone, as much as to say, "The
ruffians are gone now; you can come out."

And out of the doorway flew his pretty wife, while he slipped in to see
that all was safe.  You see, the ill-bred sparrows had been glaring at
the little madam as she sat on her nest, which was a piece of
impertinence that no self-respecting bird could endure with equanimity.

The English sparrows are not the only birds that disturb the harmony of
the bird realm.  Offenders must needs come there as well as in the
human sphere.  A friend who is entirely trustworthy tells me the
following story.  He and his wife were driving along a country road,
when their attention was directed to a kingbird in hot pursuit of a
red-headed woodpecker, which had evidently been poaching on the
first-named bird's preserves.  Being an expert flyer, the kingbird had
almost overtaken the fugitive, when suddenly the red-head wheeled to
one side, flung himself somehow or other over a telegraph wire, turning
at the same time and catching with his claws at the wire, where he
clung, his body bent in an arc, holding his enemy at bay with his long,
pointed beak and spiny tail.  Of course, the martin could not attack
him in that position, as he could not afford to run the risk of being
impaled on the red-head's spear.

Nor was that all.  The martin sailed a short distance away, and the
woodpecker thought it safe to take to wing again.  The kingbird again
started in swift pursuit, filling the air with his loud chirping, sure
of his game this time; but he was balked, as before, by the red-head's
sudden dash to the telegraph wire.  This little comedy was repeated
several times while my friends watched with surprise and amusement.

There is tragedy as well as comedy in the world of feathers.  Ernest
Thompson Seton's graphic animal stories would leave a pleasanter taste
in the mouth if they ended less tragically, but they would not be so
true to life as it is in the faunal realm.  It must be true that the
lives of most birds and animals end in tragedy, so numerous, alert, and
persistent are their foes.  As soon as a bird begins to grow old and
infirm, losing its keenness of vision and its swiftness of movement, it
cannot help falling a prey to its rapacious enemies.  For this reason
you seldom find a feeble animal or bird in the open, or one that has
lain down and died a natural death.

However, strange as it may seem, I have found the corpses of several
birds in the wild outdoors.  At an abandoned limestone quarry one
spring I discovered the nest of a pair of phoebes.  I called at the
pretty domicile a number of times in my rambles.  It was set on a shelf
of one stratum of rock, and roofed over by another.  One day I noticed
the little dame sitting quietly in her cup, and decided to go near;
just why, I cannot tell.  She did not move as I approached; she did not
even turn her head to look at me.  It was strange.  I went right up to
the nest, and yet she did not fly.  Stretching out my hand, I found
that she was dead, her unhatched eggs still under her cold and
pulseless bosom.

I could have wept for my little friends.  There was nothing to indicate
the cause of the tragedy, no disturbance of the nest, no marks of
violence on her body.  Possibly she had eaten or drunk poison; perhaps
she had received a fatal blow from an enemy, and had just had strength
enough left to come home to die.  Her mate was gone.  He was doubtless
unable to bear the ghastly sight of his dead companion on her nest.

A little field sparrow came to a tragical end in a different way.  I
found his body dangling among the bushes on a bank.  Two small but
tough grapevine twigs growing out horizontally and close together
formed a very acute angle, and this was the trap in which the innocent
bird was caught.  In some way one of his legs had slipped between the
branches, the angle of which became more acute, of course, toward the
apex.  Thus the more he struggled the more tightly his tarsus became
wedged in the trap, the foot preventing it from slipping through.  To
think of pushing his leg backward, and so releasing himself, was beyond
the poor bird's cerebral power; so he fluttered until exhausted, then
dangled there to die of starvation.  The place being very secluded, no
predatory beast or fowl had found the little corpse.

If there were only some way of protecting the nests of our beautiful
and useful birds of the wildwood, what a boon it would be to men and
fowls!  So many nests come to grief that one wonders sometimes that any
brood is ever reared.  During a recent spring, with exhausting toil and
patience, I found the nests of several shy woodland birds--the
Kentucky, the hooded, and the creeping warblers--all of them real
discoveries for me.  I promised myself a rare treat in watching the
development of the nurslings from babyhood to youth.  Alas! all the
nests were robbed, those of the Kentucky and hooded warblers of their
young, and that of the creeping warbler of its eggs.  I trust I am not
naturally vindictive; but had I the brigands in my power who despoiled
those nests, I certainly should wring their necks.

Our small birds must ever be on the _qui vive_.  Danger is always
lurking near, as a few concrete cases will show.  Brush was thrown into
a certain hollow well known to the writer, and one of the steep
hillsides was covered with timber of a medium-sized growth.  One day I
was listening to a concert given by a company of towhees and cardinals,
which were sitting in the trees at the lower border of the woodland.  A
flock of cedar waxwings were also "tseeming" in the top of a tree,
darting out at intervals into the air for insects.  Suddenly every song
ceased, and the whole company dashed down, pellmell, hurry-skurry, into
the thick brush heaps of the hollow.  At the same moment, or perhaps a
moment later--it all occurred so quickly I could not be exact--a covey
of juncos hurled themselves with reckless swiftness into the brush
pile, followed by a sparrow hawk, which uttered a queer, uncanny call
that meant death to any little bird that should be overtaken.

He flung himself through a network of branches and twigs and lightly
struck the ground below, his wings partly opening as he lit, to break
the force of the concussion.  He had dashed directly over my head.
Before I could collect my wits he gathered himself together, wormed his
way out through the branches in some way, and darted off up the
opposite slope.  He had failed to secure his prize, but it was
wonderful how so large a bird could slip through the network of
branches and extricate himself without striking a quill against a twig.

The extreme watchfulness of the small birds cannot fail to excite
wonder in the mind of the observer.  In the case just referred to not
one of the birds was taken unaware, although some of them were singing
gaily, and others were busy feeding.  Never for a moment do the birds
become so absorbed in their eating or work or play as to forget that a
foe may be lurking near.  One cannot help wondering how they can be
happy.  Suppose we were compelled to be incessantly on the lookout for
danger, should we ever have a moment of peace or joy?

A red-breasted woodpecker was chiseling out a nursery in a tall
sycamore at the border of a woodland.  At some distance, far enough
away not to alarm her, I watched the dame at her work.  This was her
method of procedure, hour by hour: She would plunge head first into the
hole, only her barred tail being visible, give three or four vigorous
dabs with her bill, then emerge and look around in every direction for
danger; seeing none, into the cavity her crimson-crowned head would
again disappear, only to emerge again a second later.  Not for a moment
did she dare to relax her vigilance.  Had she done so, in that fatal
moment a hawk might have swooped upon her and crushed her in his
merciless talons.

Yet some birds will take not a little risk, depending on their
quickness of eye and nimbleness of wing to escape their predatory foes.
In a tall sycamore tree standing alone at the fringe of a piece of
woodland, sparrow hawks, red-breasted woodpeckers, and nuthatches, a
pair of each, had set up their household gods.  The tree was still bare
of foliage, for it had few branches, and the season was early spring.
It was evident, too, that the hawks were watching for an opportunity to
assault their neighbors, to whom they often gave chase.  Yet the
woodpeckers had in some way contrived to hew out their arboreal
nursery, which was almost, if not quite, finished.  It was a freshly
chiseled cavity, as could be seen plainly from below.  The mother
nuthatch was feeding her young.  She would fly to the tree with an
insect in her bill, calling "Yank, yank," or "Ha-ha, ha-ha," as if to
announce her arrival, then glide around the branch, scurry down its
sloping wall, swing to the underside where the nest hole was, and jab
the juicy morsel into the chirruping throat of one of the bantlings
within.  The bloodthirsty hawk dashed at her several times, but she
deftly dodged around to the other side of the branch, and let him glide
harmlessly by, flinging after him a taunting "Ha-ha, ha-ha," as much as
to say, "Missed your aim again, didn't you!"  However, it was a pretty
picture the nuthatch made, holding in her bill a large beetle with
silvery wings, sometimes holding it straight out from the bark as she
glanced around to see whether the coast was clear and at the same time
calling her nasal "yank," so full of woodsy suggestion.

A trying experience for many birds comes at bedtime.  They grow quite
nervous as night begins to settle over the land, some of them chirping
loudly to express their solicitude.  As the darkness deepens, their
sight becomes obscured, and they seem to realize that they are exposed
to dangers unseen.  You have often, no doubt, noticed the to-do made by
the robins as the time for retiring draws near.  What foes may be
lurking in the growing darkness they know not.

A favorite roosting place for the sparrows, towhees, juncos, and even
the robins, was in some thickets by the roadside.  As I passed along, a
bird would occasionally leap from his perch to the ground and go
galloping away over the rustling leaves.  At one place a half dozen
Harris sparrows were chirping loudly and flitting about a couple of
small trees, which were partly covered with a thick network of vines.
The cause of their uneasiness could not be determined, unless it was
their natural fear of the darkness.  I waited until night had settled.
Presently the sparrows became quiet.  Tramping about near the trees did
not disturb them, but when I flung a lighted stick against one of the
trees, they flew out of their matted bedroom with loud outcries.  For a
few minutes they could be seen dashing about from tree to tree; then
they settled down for the night.

[Illustration: Bob-white, or Quail]

In view of the many trials that naturally come into the life of the
birds, we should be all the kinder to them.  Why add to their sorrows?
Let me give you an example of humane treatment in one case--that of the
quail or bob-white.  Not long ago I listened to a sensible lecturer on
natural history subjects.

He did not say we should never kill the quail.  They have evidently
been created for man's use, or they would not have been given such
juicy and nutritious flesh; just as many other fowls and animals were
made to minister to the subsistence and pleasure of the human family.
Besides, there can be no doubt that, if the quail were all permitted to
live and multiply, they would soon become so abundant as to do much
harm in our grain fields.  So some of them should be killed, but not in
a cruel manner.

One thing is certain, they should not be killed with shotguns!  You ask
at once and in some surprise, Why not?  Because that is cruel.  Don't
you see how?  Well, that is the way with most of us--we do many things
without thinking.  It is not cruel to kill quail with a shotgun
providing they are killed outright.  But have you never thought how
many of the fine shot must wound some of the birds that fly away?  A
bird with several shots in its body may not be fatally hurt at first,
but will fly off and alight somewhere in the bushes where no hunter can
find it.  In a few days the wounds grow sore, then gangrene sets in,
and the bird slowly dies in awful torture.  No one to help it, no one
even to pity.  Is not that cruel?

But how are these birds to be treated?  They should be dealt with
kindly, fed in winter, so that they will become comparatively tame,
somewhat like the fowl of the barnyard.  Then, in the proper season,
they should be caught with a net.  This can be done by placing the nets
in such a way that the birds will run into them about the brush heaps,
in which they are fond of taking refuge.  Skill and shrewdness are
needed to catch them in this way, and, perhaps, it cannot be done while
they are shot at so much and are made so shy; but the time will come
when the netting of quail will be regarded as rare sport in America, as
hawking or fox hunting is in England.

When the birds are caught their heads should be snipped off as you do
those of domestic fowls, or in some other way that is as painless as
possible.  According to this plan not so many birds can be secured, it
is true, but it would be well to let the quail become more abundant in
our country, for in certain seasons of the year they destroy certain
kinds of insects that do much harm to the grain.  Besides, they are
such sweet and innocent birds that all of us like to see them scuttling
along by the roadside, and listen to their musical calling in the
clover fields--"Bob white! bob white!"  Then, too, if they were allowed
to become tame and plentiful, we might sometimes have the luxury of
quail's eggs on our tables.




A BIRD'S EDUCATION*

*Reprinted by permission from "Forest and Stream."


So far as regards the recent discussion as to how animals learn,
whether by instinct or instruction, my study of birds leads me to take
a middle position; perhaps I would better say to take sides with both
parties.  Birds acquire knowledge partly by instinct and partly by
tutelage, and the same is no doubt true of all other animals.  This
statement will be borne out by several concrete cases.

Some years ago I made a number of experiments in rearing young birds
taken as early as possible from the nest.  Among them were meadowlarks,
red-winged blackbirds, brown thrashers, blue jays, wood thrushes,
catbirds, flickers, red-headed woodpeckers, and several other species.
Nearly all of them were secured some time before they were naturally
ready to leave their natal places.  Without any instruction from
parents or older birds they soon left the nests I had improvised for
them, hopped about on the cage floor for a while, and presently
insisted on clambering upon the perches, to which they clung in the
regulation way.  Indeed, I noted again and again that the impulse to
seek a perch was so strong that the young birds seemed to be moved to
it by an imperative command.  Nor were they long satisfied with a low
perch, but instinctively mounted to the highest one they could find.

The same was true in regard to flight.  No feathered adult was present
to tutor them in the art of using their wings, yet they soon acquired
that power of their own accord.  It was inborn--the gift of flight.
True, they were awkward at first, and gained skill only by degrees, but
the original impulse was in their constitution.  It is no doubt true
that parent birds in the outdoors do give their young lessons in
flight, but if the bantlings were left to themselves, they would
acquire that art through their original endowment, although more slowly
and with many more hard knocks.

As every one knows, juvenile birds at first open their mouths for their
food.  Proof may not be at hand for the opinion, but I am disposed to
believe that they never need to be told by their parents to do that;
their instincts prompt them.  It must be so, I think, for to suppose
that the bird baby only a day or two from the shell could understand a
parental command to open its mouth would be to presume that it has the
instinct to grasp the meaning of such a behest, and that is more
difficult to believe than that Nature simply impels it to take its food
by opening its mandibles.

Now, when the young birds are taken from the nest and reared by hand,
they insist for a long time on being fed in the juvenile manner.
However, by and by they begin of their own volition to pick up food
after the manner of the adults.  At first they are very clumsy about
it, but they persevere until they acquire skill, and presently they
refuse entirely to open their mandibles for food.  Here again Nature is
their sole guide.  Without human or avian suggestion they also learn to
drink in the well-known bird fashion; also to bathe, chirp, frolic, and
do many other things.  Who has ever seen a pet bird in drinking try to
lap like a dog, or take in long draughts like a cow or a horse?  No;
Nature made them birds, and birds they will be.  It is noticeable, too,
that when birds begin to peck, or bathe, or seek a perch, they do not
usually act as if they were deliberately planning to do so, nor as if
they were carrying on some process of thought leading to choice, but
rather as if they were impelled by Nature to do so.

The chirping of birds is mostly, if not wholly, a matter of
inheritance.  For instance, my little wood thrushes, as soon as they
reached a sufficient age, called just like their relatives of the
sylvan solitudes; my brown thrashers uttered the labial chirp of the
species; my red-winged blackbird exclaimed "Chack! chack!" after the
manner of his kind; my bluebirds expressed their feelings in the sad
little purr of _Sialia sialis_; my flickers did not borrow the calls of
the red-heads, but each clung to its own language; my catbirds mewed
like poor pussy in trouble; and so on through the whole list.  True,
these pets may have heard their parents' calls before they were taken
from the nest, but it is not at all likely that they would have
remembered them, for at first they only "cheeped" after the manner of
most bantlings, and only a good while afterward did they fall to using
the adult chirp.  Besides, while still in the nest, they must have
heard many other bird calls; why did they not acquire them?  Heredity
has laid a strong hand upon birds, and has drawn sharp dividing lines
among the various species.

Instinct also plays a large part in moving the bird to sing and to
render the peculiar arias of its kind.  For instance, a pet wood thrush
of mine, secured at an early age and kept far away from all his kith of
the wildwood, became a fine musician.  And what do you suppose was the
tune he executed?  It was the sweet, dreamy, somewhat labored song of
the wood thrush in his native wilds.  He never sang any other tune.  I
think he sang it better than any wild thrush I have ever heard.  It was
louder, clearer, more full-toned, but the quality of voice and the
technique were precisely the same.  Who was his teacher?  No one but
Nature, heredity, instinct, whatever you choose to call it.  There was
no wild thrush within a half mile of his cage.

[Illustration: Robin]

The case of a pet thrasher was almost as striking.  It is true, he may
have heard several of his kin singing about the premises during the
first spring of his captivity, but it is not probable that he learned
their melodies so early in life.  As the next spring approached, he
began to sing the very medleys that the wild thrashers sing with so
much earnestness and skill, and this was long before any thrashers had
come back from the South.

I must now describe several cases in which inherited instinct did not
prove so true a teacher.  A young robin was once given me by a friend,
and was kept by myself and others until the following summer.  Strange
as it may seem, he never acquired the well-known robin carol.
Sometimes there were vague hints of it in his vocal performances, but
for the most part he whistled strains in a loud, shrill tone that no
wild robin ever dreamed of inflicting on the world.  They were more
like crude human efforts at whistling than anything else.  Indeed, I
think they were picked up from the whistling he heard about the house.
Some of his strains were very sweet, and all of them were wonderful for
a bird.  A friend played "Yankee Doodle" on a cornet, and Master
'Rastus--for that was his name--gave a very fair and funny imitation of
part of the air.  There were many robins caroling in the trees about
the premises, and 'Rastus was often left out of doors among them, but
he never acquired the red-breast minstrelsy.

A similar instance was that of a pet red-winged blackbird, which,
instead of whistling the labored "Grook-o-lee" of his species, learned
to mimic all kinds of sounds in and out of the house, among them the
crowing of the cocks of the barnyard.  These two instances would
indicate that some birds must at least be associated with their kin in
order to learn the songs of their species.

My comical pet blue jay gave proof of the need of parental training.
While he intuitively called like a jay, he never was able to sing the
sweet, gurgling roulade of the wild jays.  On the contrary, he treated
us to all kinds of odd, imitative, mirth-provoking performances that no
self-respecting jay in the open would think of enacting.  After several
months of cage life he was given his liberty.  Now, indeed, he showed
his lack of jay bringing up, and how little, in some respects, mere
instinct can be relied on.  When evening came he perched on a limb of
the maple tree before the house, in a place as exposed as he could well
find, not knowing that there was more danger in an outdoor roost than
in his shielding cage.  I could not induce him to come down, nor could
I climb out to the branch on which he sat, and so I was compelled to
leave him out of doors.

The next morning he was safe, the screech owls of the neighborhood
having overlooked him in some way.  The next evening he went to roost
in the same exposed place, and that was the last I ever saw of my
beloved pet.  He was undoubtedly killed and devoured by the owls.  Had
he been reared out of doors in the usual way, his parents would have
taught him to find a roosting place that was secure from predatory
foes.  No one has ever seen a wild jay sleeping in an exposed place.

In her charming little book, "True Bird Stories," Mrs. Olive Thorne
Miller says that she "once watched the doings in a crow nursery."  I
quote:

"The most important thing the elders had to do was to teach the
youngsters how to fly, and every little while one or both of the
parents would fly around the pasture, giving a peculiar call as they
went.  This call appeared to be an order to the little folks to follow,
for all would start up and circle round for a minute or two, and then
drop back to the fence or the ground to rest.

"Once, while I was watching them, this cry was given, and all flew as
usual except one bob-tailed baby, who stood on a big stone in the
middle of the field.  He was perhaps so comfortable that he did not
want to go, or it may be he was afraid, and thought mamma would not
notice him.  But mothers' eyes are sharp, and she did see him.  She
knew, too, that baby crows must learn to fly; so when all came down
again she flew right at the naughty bird, and knocked him off his
perch.  He squawked, and fluttered his wings to keep from falling, but
the blow came so suddenly that he had not time to save himself, and he
fell flat on the ground.  In a minute he clambered back upon his stone,
and I watched him closely.  The next time the call came to fly he did
not linger, but went with the rest, and so long as I could watch him he
never disobeyed again."

This is evidence not only of parental teaching, but also of parental
discipline.  Here is another bit from the same volume, bearing its
lesson on its face.  "A lady told me a funny story about a robin.  He
was brought up in the house from the nest, and never learned to sing
the robin song, for he had not heard it.  He plainly tried to make some
sort of music, and one of the family taught him to whistle 'Yankee
Doodle'.  He whistled it perfectly, and never tried to sing anything
else.  Once this Yankee Doodle robin got out of the house and flew up
into a tree.  When the wild birds came about him he entertained them by
whistling his favorite air, which sent the birds off in a panic."

Do not the facts recited in this sketch prove that birds know and
acquire some things through the promptings of instinct, while other
things they can learn only by avian teaching?

My notes on instinct and education in bird song correspond with the
conviction expressed by Dr. W. H. Hudson on page 257 of his interesting
book entitled "The Naturalist in La Plata," fourth edition, 1903: "It
is true that Daines Barrington's notion that young song birds learn to
sing only by imitating the adults, still holds its ground; and Darwin
gives it his approval in his 'Descent of Man'.  It is perhaps one of
those doctrines which are partly true, or which do not contain the
whole truth; and it is possible to believe that, while many singing
birds do so learn their songs, or acquire a greater proficiency in them
from hearing the adults, in other species the song comes instinctively,
and is, like other instincts and habits, purely an 'inherited memory'."
What Dr. Hudson surmises may be the case, I believe my experiments have
proved to be true.




ARE BIRDS SINGERS OR WHISTLERS?*

*Reprinted by permission from "Our Animal Friends."


Not a little discussion has arisen among the dissectors as to the
anatomy of bird song.  Into this controversy I shall not enter--at
least, not in a controversial spirit--but shall recount only what may
be regarded as the best and latest results of scientific research.  How
does a bird produce the melodious notes that emanate from his throat?
Are they manufactured far down in the trachea, or only at its anterior
opening?  Are they voice tones or flute tones?  These questions will be
answered as we proceed to examine the bird's lyrical apparatus without
going into wearisome detail, or making use of many difficult scientific
terms, which are the bane of the general reader.

Let me begin at the upper end of the avian singing machine--that is,
with the mouth, including the bill, the lips of which are called
mandibles.  Just as the movements of the human lips have much to do
with the modifications of the human voice, so the opening and closing
of the bird's mandibles exercise a modifying influence upon avicular
tones.  If it were not so, the feathered minstrel would not keep his
mandibles in such constant motion during his lyrical recitals.  You
will notice that whenever he desires to strike a very high and loud
note he opens his mandibles quite widely, sometimes almost to the
fullest possible extent.

However, the expansion and contraction of the throat orifice, no doubt,
produce still more marked variations in the tones of the vocalist; yet
it must be borne in mind that closed or partly closed mandibles will
obstruct the passage of the air from the throat, while open mandibles
will permit of a full passage of the air current, and the tones will
vary accordingly.  Besides, the roof of the bird's mouth is grooved or
convex, and therefore the character of the sounds will be somewhat
dependent upon the position and movement of the upper mandible.

And then there is the bird's tongue, which is constantly in motion
while the musical rehearsal is going on.  Throughout its entire length
it can be raised and lowered at the bird's will, or be made to quiver
and roll, and by this means the air column forced up from the lungs is
manipulated in a wonderful way, producing in some cases an almost
unlimited variety of modulation.

Within the bird's neck two elastic tubes run down from the mouth into
the chest.  One of them is the gullet or aesophagus, which is the
channel through which the bird's food descends into the crop and
gizzard.  The other little cylinder lies in front of the gullet, and is
called the windpipe or trachea, and reaches down to the lungs, which
are the bellows furnishing the wind for the avian pipe organ.  As Dr.
Coues says, the trachea is "composed of a series of very numerous
gristly or bony rings connected together by an elastic membrane," and
is supplied with an intricate set of muscles by which it can be
shortened or elongated at the will of the songster himself.

Now let us look at the upper end of this wonderful pneumatic pipe,
which so often throws Pan and all his coterie into a transport when the
thrasher and the wood thrush flute their dithyrambs.  Here we find the
larynx.  It is simply the anterior specialized portion of the trachea,
located at the base of the tongue, and in mammals is honored as the
voice organ, whereas in birds it is distinguished as the fluting
apparatus, the instrument that really produces the varied vocalization
of the bird realm.  But the music is not the product of vocal cords, as
is the case in the human larynx, for at the upper end of the avian
larynx there is a slit or fissure, somewhat elliptical in form, and set
in the fork of the hyoid bone, which constitutes the bifurcated root of
the tongue.  This fissure is called the glottis.  At the bird's fiat,
it can be opened and closed and made to assume a great variety of
forms.  Moreover, just in front of it there is a fold of mucous
membrane called the epiglottis, which is in reality a tiny trapdoor
closing over the opening when necessity requires.  When the bird
swallows food or drink, this little flap shuts down, and prevents the
entrance of any clogging substance into the windpipe to choke the
feathered diner.

We have now come to the most strategic point in our investigation of
the anatomy of bird song, for in the avian world a special distinction
has been conferred upon that little orifice in the bird's throat called
the glottis.  It is here that all the music, as well as all other
so-called vocal sounds, are generated--they are simply piped or fluted
through a slit, so that birds are _whistlers_, not singers or
vocalists.  I repeat, so that my meaning may be perfectly clear--bird
music is not produced by means of vocal cords, as is the music of the
human throat, but by means of a whistling aperture in the larynx.  And
that wonderful cleft has been placed there for that specific purpose.
Properly speaking, therefore, the feathered choralist does not have a
voice, but only a wind instrument; albeit a marvelous contrivance it is.

It will be easy now to see how the bird's tones are capable of a large
variety of modulations.  The glottis is controlled by a system of
muscles that are perfectly obedient, within their limits, to the bird's
volitions, and thus it may be made to assume a great number of
different forms, each giving expression to a different vocal effect.
The shape of the glottis is also modified in numerous ways by the
movement of the tongue and mandibles.  Nor is that all, for the air
column pumped up from the lungs may be increased or diminished at will,
a very strong current producing a loud tone, and a feeble current a low
one.  The elongation or contraction of the whole throat will also
modify the pneumatic column, and thereby alter the quality of the tones.

We may go still further in our analysis.  Suppose a bird should open
his mouth and throat as widely as possible, hold all his lyrical organs
steady, and blow his windpipe with all the strength his lungs could
command, it is obvious that the effect would be a clear, loud, uniform
whistle, such as the meadowlark sends across the green fields.  But
suppose he desires to "blow a dreamy hautbois note, slender and refined
as ever stirred the air of Arcady or trembled in the vineyards of old
Provence," then all the musician in plumes needs to do is to contract
the slit in his throat, depress his tongue, almost close his mandibles,
and simply allow a slender air current to sift from the lungs through
the syrinx and out of the glottis.  What if the whim should seize him
to pipe a trill or a quaver to the water witches of the meadow, as
Master Song Sparrow so often chooses to do?  Then he simply needs to
set his tongue and throat to quivering, and you have his enrapturing
tremolo.  Beautiful, is it not?

There are birds that send a kind of guttural sound from their throats,
such as the cuckoos and occasionally the blue jays.  Notice the cuckoo
as he utters his call, which every swain interprets as the harbinger of
a coming shower, and you will observe that his throat bulges out like
that of a croaking frog, and quivers at the same time in a convulsed
way.  It is plain that the air about to be forced from the glottis is
flung back by some muscular action and set to vibrating in the
laryngean cavity, thus giving the sound its croaking quality when the
elastic current is finally released.

Now, if the reader will pucker up his lips and whistle a tune, he will
notice that the sound is actually produced at the small labial orifice
and nowhere else; however, the tones are modified and modulated at will
in a variety of ways--by a deft, though almost imperceptible,
manipulation of the tongue, by a slight enlargement or contraction of
the aperture, and especially by a dexterous control of the air column
blown from the lungs.  Just so the lyrists of fields and woods pipe
their roundels and _chansons_ through the chink in their throats, save
that in the bird's case the mouth and tongue are anterior to the
whistling aperture.  I know a young man who has trained himself so as
to be able to mimic to perfection the complex songs of the western
meadowlark and the cardinal grosbeak.  He does it by whistling.

Near the lower end of the trachea, just above the lungs, there is a
specialized organ of the bird's throat called the syrinx.  It is a
cylinder formed of bony rings, provided with a mesh of muscles, and
having membranous folds which act as valves upon the two orifices of
the _bronchi_ leading to the lungs.  Many scientific gentlemen have
declared that the syrinx is the voice organ of the birds, the elastic
margins of the folds or valves being set to vibrating by the projection
of the air from the lungs, and thus producing the varied lays we hear
in the outdoor concert.  However, Mr. Maurice Thompson--who, by the
way, found time to do something else besides writing "Alice of Old
Vincennes," and something just as creditable to his talent,
too--dissected many birds with special reference to this subject, and
gave close attention to birds in the act of singing, both out of doors
and in captivity, and I am convinced that he proved the theory of the
syringeal origin of bird song to be an erroneous one.

Only two reasons need be adduced for this conclusion.  First, it is
unreasonable to suppose that the rich, loud, clear notes of the
thrasher, the cardinal, and the mockingbird, lilting across the fields
and capable of being heard a long distance, are generated far down in
the lyrist's chest by the vibrating of the margin of a tiny mucous
membrane.  If it had its genesis there, it surely would display a
muffled or guttural or sepulchral quality.  In the second place, it has
been proved by actual dissection that the shrike, which possesses no
song gift worthy of the name, has a well-developed syrinx, while the
mockingbird, our feathered minstrel _par excellence_, has a syrinx that
is absolutely insignificant.  On the other hand, the shrike's larynx,
including the glottis, is a clumsy affair, whereas the mocker's larynx
is indeed wonderfully made.

[Illustration: Meadow Lark]

It must not be supposed, however, that the syrinx does not perform an
important function in the production of avian melody.  It acts as a
regulator or meter of the air impelled from the lungs.  By means of the
folds or membranous valves the mouths of the bronchial tubes may be
opened widely or almost closed, and in this way, to quote from Mr.
Thompson, "the bird is enabled to measure in the nicest manner the
amount of air thrown from the lungs into the trachea."  In producing a
staccato, for example, the valves flop up and down, doling out the air
at the proper intervals and in precisely the right quantities.

Indeed, nothing in the world of Nature is more wonderful than the gift
of bird song, and nothing proves more clearly the doctrine of design,
or, at least, of adaptation to a specialized purpose.




BIRD FLIGHT*

*Reprinted by permission from "The Evening Post," New York.


The question why man cannot fly may be answered in a very simple and
yet satisfactory manner: He has not been organically constructed for
that purpose.  That may seem like cutting the Gordian knot, but, after
all, it is the only explanation that can be given.  You might as well
ask why man cannot clutch a perch with his foot after the manner of a
bird or a monkey, for the response would be the same--his foot was made
for walking, and not for prehensile purposes.  On the other hand, the
bird cannot grasp an object with its wings, while a man's hand is well
adapted for the performance of such a function.  Nature's motto in her
whole realm seems to be: "Every creature after its kind."

When we look at the structure of the flying birds, we see at once that
they were formed for swift locomotion through the air, just as plainly
as the lithe skiff was made to glide over the water or the carriage to
spin over the land.  In the first place, the body of the bird is
comparatively light--that is, in proportion to the width, strength, and
extent of its wings.  By its thick, light, airy covering of feathers
its body is made still more buoyant, besides presenting a larger
surface to the supporting air with very little additional weight.  The
tail, too, with its long, closely woven quills spread out like a fan,
not only serves the purpose of a rudder for guiding the aërial craft,
but is still more useful in helping to sustain the bird's weight in the
up-buoying element.

It is interesting to note that the feathers on the bodies of the flying
birds are arranged in tracts, with intervals here and there of quite,
or almost, bare skin, called "apteria."  Now, when a bird is carefully
skinned, it will be seen that the feathered spaces have their own
special slips of muscles inserted into the roots of the feathers, and
when these muscles are contracted, they serve to raise the feathers,
and must, therefore, be of some subsidiary value in flying, by making
the bird's body more buoyant.  Suggestive, indeed, is the fact that the
plumes of the non-flyers are not arranged in tracts, but are evenly
distributed over the body.

Nor is that all that Nature has done to carry out her evident purpose
of making the bird a natural "flying machine."  The body of the bird
contains numerous air sacs, all connected with the lungs, and these,
when inflated, are a great help in flying by making the bird light.
More than that, many of the bones, though strong, have thin walls and
are hollow, the cavities being connected with the lungs and air sacs,
from which they are also filled with air, contributing another element
of lightness to the aërial navigator.  That the bird's bones are
capable of being permeated with air can be demonstrated by actual
experiment, and is, therefore, a scientifically established fact.  It
is easy enough to prove it in this way: Take a dead bird that has been
beheaded, pass a syringe into its windpipe, tie it carefully so that
the air cannot escape at the sides, then blow the air down through the
tube, and you will be able to follow the passage of the air into the
skin and other parts of the body.  Now, if you will cut off one of the
bones, you can detect the air passing from the cut surface; and, more
than that, as a scientific English writer says, "if the experiment be
made by using colored fluid instead of air--which is pumped in by a
syringe--the fluid can be seen to ooze from the ends of any bone or
muscle that has been cut across."  Thus it is seen that the whole body
of the fowl is so constructed that it can be pervaded with air.

However, while all parts of the bird's organism combine to produce the
end in view, the special instruments of flight are the wings.  They are
really the fore limbs of the fowl, but differ in many respects from the
fore limbs of the mammals.  They are under the control of muscles of
great comparative strength, as every one knows who has ever been beaten
by the wings of even an ordinary barnyard fowl, which has meagre powers
of flight.  What a powerful stroke a large hawk or an eagle must be
able to deliver!  If man's arm muscles were as strong in proportion, he
might have some hope of one day navigating the air on artificial wings,
but it is due principally to this muscular weakness that Darius Green
has never been able to make a success of his flying machine, and
perhaps never will.  He would not have the strength to wield wings
large enough to sustain so much avoirdupois on the yielding air.

The wings are highly specialized members of the avicular organism, and
hence differ in many important respects from the fore or pectoral limbs
of the mammals.  Beginning at the point nearest the body, let us
examine one of these wonderful instruments.  The wing proper begins at
the shoulder joint, which hinges freely upon the shoulder in a shallow
socket, into which the globular head of the first bone fits closely,
and in which it is firmly held by the powerful muscles that control the
organs of flight.  The first bone is called the humerus, and is the
largest and strongest bone of the wing, extending from the shoulder to
the elbow.  At the elbow, which is the first angle of the wing,
reaching backward when the wing is folded, the humerus articulates in a
wisely designed way with two other bones, called the ulna and radius,
which together constitute the forearm and extend to the wrist joint.
It must be remembered that, when the wing is closed, the forearm is the
segment that reaches obliquely forward.  The wrist joint is the second
angle of the wing.  In the wrist there are two small bones (the radiale
and ulnare) which serve an important purpose in joining the forearm
with what is known as the hand, and make possible the specialized
movement of the two parts upon each other.  The hand is the terminal
segment of the wing, composed of the metacarpal bones and the digits or
fingers.  Of the last-named organs there are ordinarily three, forming
a graceful tapering point to the wing, and giving to it the symmetry
and proportion that are required for effective use.  When the wing is
folded, the hand extends obliquely downward and backward.

Now, these bones and their attendant ligatures are wonderfully and
wisely contrived.  The humerus moves freely in its socket in the
shoulder, so that it can be swung in every required direction, and yet,
as should be the case, its principal movement is up and down in a
vertical line--the precise movement required for the effective
wingstrokes in flight.  But note further.  The elbow joint, unlike that
of the shoulder, is a rigid hinge, permitting motion in only one plane,
that of the wing itself, or nearly so.  The same is true of the wrist
joint, which holds the hand firmly, allowing no motion save that which
opens and closes the wing.  The wisdom of this arrangement will be seen
at a glance.

In the human arm the hand can be moved in every direction with the
greatest freedom, and, moreover, the wrist may be turned and the hand
laid on its back, its palm, its edge, or at almost any conceivable
angle.  This is a very convenient contrivance for man, but it would be
a great misfortune for our avian friends if their wings would rotate so
readily; for in that case they would not have sufficient rigidity to
answer the purposes of flight, but would be twisted into every position
by the assaults of the air currents.  Besides, even in ordinary flight
it would require a constant muscular effort to keep the wings in the
proper position.  How wisely Nature has devised the bird's flying
apparatus!  When outstretched, it is held firmly by the power of its
own mechanism, with its broad under surface lying horizontally, and no
breezy current can bend or twist it from its normal position.

The set of muscles that open the wing are called the extensors, and
those that close it, the flexors.  The former lie upon the back of the
upper arm and the front of the forearm and the hand, their tendons
passing over the convexities of the elbow and wrist, while the flexors
occupy the opposite sides, and their tendons run up into the
concavities of the joints.  There are several powerful pectoral muscles
which run out from the shoulder and breast, and operate upon the upper
end of the humerus, and with these the wing is lifted and the strokes
are made during flight.

Another mechanical contrivance deserves attention.  An extremely
elastic cord reaches over from the shoulder to the wrist joint,
supporting a fold of skin that occupies the deep angle of the elbow,
and that is covered with short, fluffy feathers.  When the bird is
flying, this cord is stretched and forms the front edge of that section
of the wing.  But, now, suppose the wing is closed, will not this cord
make a cumbersome fold, flapping loosely in the angle of the elbow?
Such would, indeed, be the case, did not its extreme elasticity enable
it to contract to the proper length, so as to keep the wing's border
straight and smooth.

Without the feathers the wing would be useless as an instrument of
flight.  The shorter plumes that shield the bases of the long quill
feathers are called the coverts, which are found on both the upper and
under surfaces of the wing.  They are divided into several sets,
according to the position they occupy, and are called the "primary
coverts" (because they overlie the bases of the primaries), the
"greater coverts," the "middle coverts," and the "lesser coverts."
Forming a vast expansion of the bony and fleshy framework are the
quills, or flight-feathers, called collectively the "remiges."  These
plumes mainly determine the contour of the wing, and constitute a thin,
elastic surface for striking the air--one that is sufficiently
resilient to give the proper rebound and yet firm enough to support the
bird's weight.  The longest quills are those that grow on the hand or
outer extremity of the wing and are known as the primaries.  What are
called the secondaries are attached to the ulna of the forearm, while
the tertiaries occupy the humerus and are next to the body.  All these
feathers are so placed relatively that the stiff outer vane of each
quill overlaps the more flexible inner vane of its successor, like the
leaves of certain kinds of fans, thus presenting an unbroken surface to
the air.  As to the structure of these plumes, they combine firmness,
lightness, and mobility, the barbs and barbules knitting the more
flexible parts together, so that they do not separate, but only expand,
when the wing is unfolded.

[Illustration: Barn Swallow]

While the primary purpose of wings is flight, there is quite a number
of notable exceptions.  A concrete example is the ostrich, whose wings
are too feeble to lift it from the ground, but evidently aid the great
fowl in running, as it holds them outspread while it skims over the
plain, perhaps using them mainly as outriggers or balancing poles in
its swift passage on its stilt-like legs.  The penguins convert their
wings into fins while swimming through the water, the feathers closely
resembling scales.

There are birds of many kinds, and therefore a great variety of wings
and modes of flight.  Birds with short, broad, rounded wings, with the
under surface slightly concave and the upper surface correspondingly
convex, usually have comparatively heavy bodies, and race through the
air with rapid wing-beats and rather labored flight, and compass only
short distances.  Among the birds of this kind of aërial movement may
be mentioned the American meadowlark, the bob-white, and the pheasant.
Other species propel themselves in rapid, gliding, and continued flight
by means of long, narrow, and pointed wings, like the swifts, swallows,
and goatsuckers, while many others, notably herons, hawks, vultures,
and eagles, are distinguished by a vast alar expansion in proportion to
their weight, and hence are able to sustain themselves in the air by
sailing, with only a slight stroke at rare intervals.  Such birds as
the stormy petrel and the frigate-bird have wings that are broad,
convex, and of great length in contrast with the lightness and small
bulk of their bodies, for which reason they are able to sustain
themselves in the air for days without rest.  It is even thought that
some of these wonderful birds of the limitless ocean sleep on the wing,
though how such an hypothesis could be proved it would be difficult to
say.

Even in this day of scientific research and astuteness, it must not be
supposed that everything about the mechanics of avicular flight is
understood.  We may readily comprehend how a bird, without fluttering
its wings, can poise in the air; but how can it move forward or in a
circle, and even mount upward, without a visible movement of a pinion?
And this some birds are able to do without reference to the direction
of the ethereal currents.  That, I venture to say, is still a mystery.
It almost seems as if some of the masters of aërial navigation in the
bird world were gifted with the ability to propel themselves forward by
a mere act of volition.

An interesting article on the subject of bird flight appeared not long
ago in one of the foremost periodicals of the country, a part of which
is here quoted to show what a puzzling problem we have before us:

Recent developments in aërial navigation have renewed interest in the
comparative study of the mechanical principles involved in the flying
of birds.  There is one exceedingly puzzling law in regard to birds and
all flying creatures, the solution of which may work far-reaching
influences in the construction of flying craft.

"This law, which has thus far perplexed scientists, is that the heavier
and bigger the bird or insect, the less relative wing area is required
for its support.  Thus the area of wing surface of a gnat is forty-nine
units of area to every one of weight.  In graphic contrast to that, a
condor (_Sarcorhamphus gryphus_) which weighed 16.52 pounds had a wing
surface of 9.80 square feet.  In other words, though the gnat needs
wing surface in a ratio of forty-nine square feet per pound of weight,
a great condor manages to sail along majestically with .59 of a square
foot to at least a pound of weight.  The unexplained phenomenon
persists consistently throughout the whole domain of entomology and
ornithology.  Going up the scale from the gnat, it is found that with
the dragon fly this ratio is 30 to 1, with the _tipula_, or
daddy-longlegs, 14.5 to 1, the cockchafer only 5.15 to 1, the
rhinoceros beetle 3.14 to 1.

"Among birds the paradoxical law that the smaller the creature the
bigger the relative supporting wings holds good.  A screech owl (_Scops
zorca_) weighing one-third of a pound had 2.35 square feet of wing
surface per pound of weight.  A fish hawk (_Pandion haliaetus_)
weighing nearly three pounds had a wing area of 1.08 square feet to
each pound.  A turkey buzzard weighing 5.6 pounds had a little less
than one square foot of wing surface to each pound.  A griffon vulture
(_Gyps fulvus_) weighing 16.52 pounds had a wing surface of only .68
square feet to the pound.

"Students of aërial navigation who are devoting much attention to
observations of birds say that if the peculiar law governing extant
flying creatures could be fathomed the problem of human flight might be
solved."




A BIRD'S FOOT

You will agree with me, after you have studied a bird's foot, that it
is one of Nature's most wonderful contrivances, so admirably adapted
for the purposes to which it is devoted that one cannot help feeling
that a Divine Mind must have planned it, just as a man would make a
watch for the express purpose of keeping time.

But what is properly included in a bird's foot?  Here we shall have to
correct a popular mistake, if we wish to be accurate, in the scientific
sense of the term.  Most people think that the avian foot consists only
of the toes and claws, or the part that comes in direct contact with
the ground or the perch.  That, however, is an error, for the foot
really comprises, in addition to the toes and claws, the first long
bone of the limb, reaching from the base of the digits to the first
joint.  You will see, therefore, that the bird walks on its toes, not
on its foot as a whole.

The long bone referred to--called the tarsus--corresponds to the instep
of the human foot, that is, the foot proper, while the joint which
extends backward, forming an angle with the next large bone, is really
the bird's heel.  Thus you perceive that most birds walk with their
heels high in the air.  What most people call the bird's "leg" is in
reality the bird's foot, and what they call its "foot" comprises only
its toes and claws.

To obtain a correct idea of the bird's entire walking apparatus, we
begin with the uppermost part of the leg.  As we proceed, it would be
well to keep in mind the different parts of the human leg and foot.
The highest bone is called the thigh bone or femur, which is, for the
most part, enclosed in the general integument of the body, and is not
entirely separate from it as is the thigh bone of the human leg.  Among
carvers it is known as the "second joint."  It reaches forward and
slightly downward, and is hidden under the feathers of the body.  The
upper end of the femur enlarges into a globular head, which fits into
the socket of the hip in the pelvis, while the lower end meets another
long bone, which extends obliquely backward and downward and with which
it forms the knee joint.

The knee of the bird extends forward, as the human knee does when it is
bent.  By means of various nodules and tendons the femur is articulated
with and fastened to the next large bone at the knee joint.  This
second bone is the leg proper, called in scientific language the crus.
When, with its thick, palatable flesh, it is cooked and placed on the
table, it is known as the "drumstick"--a favorite part of the fowl with
hungry boys, vying, in their minds, with the "white meat" of the breast.

This important segment of the limb is composed of two bones, the larger
of which is called the tibia, the smaller the fibula.  At its lower end
the tibia forms what is known as the ankle joint by articulating with
the next long bone, which is commonly called the tarsus, although the
proper name would be really metatarsus.  It is not often that this bone
is covered with flesh, and therefore it seldom finds its way to the
table.  Properly speaking, it is the larger part of the bird's foot,
reaching obliquely upward and backward from the roots of the toes to
the heel.  If you will lift yourself upon your toes, holding your heels
in the air, you will be able to form a correct idea of what the bird is
doing whenever it stands or walks or perches.

The toes are fastened by means of well adapted joints to the lower end
of the tarsus, and form what is popularly regarded as the bird's foot.
When spoken of separately, these toes are called digits, and when
spoken of collectively, they are called the podium.  They are composed
of small bones called phalanges or internodes, which are jointed upon
one another like the several parts of the human fingers.  The digits
can be spread out for walking purposes, or bent around so as to clasp
an object.  The outer bone of each digit almost always bears a nail or
claw, which is sometimes very strong and hooked, as is the case with
the birds of prey, while in other species it is only slightly curved
and is not meant as a weapon of offense or defense, but chiefly to
enable the bird to "scratch for a living."

How do the birds, in perching and roosting, retain their hold so long
on a limb without becoming weary?  They do not need to make a conscious
effort to do this, but are held by the mechanical action of certain
muscles and tendons in the leg and foot.   Of course, the bird can also
control these muscles by an act of its will, but a large part of their
action is automatic.  In some species there is a muscle called the
ambiens, which has its rise in the pelvis, passes along the inner side
of the thigh, whence its tendon runs over the apex of the angle of the
knee joint, and down the leg till it joins the muscles that flex the
toes.  Now when the bird's leg is bent at the joints, as is the case in
perching, the tendons of this muscle are stretched over the knee and
ankle joints, thus pulling the digits together, and causing them of
their own accord to grasp the perch more or less tightly.  When a bird
wishes to unloose its hold, it simply rises on its feet and relaxes the
tendons.

All birds by no means possess this particular muscle, but all the
perchers have some muscular arrangement in the legs and toes that
practically answers the same purpose.  If you will bend your wrist
backward as far as you can, you will observe that your fingers will
have a tendency to curve slightly forward.  This is caused by the
stretching of the tendons over the convex part of your bent wrist
joints.

The typical bird has four digits, three in front and one reaching
backward.  The hind toe is called the hallux, and corresponds to the
thumb of the human hand, so that in grasping an object it can be made
to meet any of the other toes.  But many birds are not provided with a
quartet of digits.  The ostrich has only two, the inner and hinder toes
being wanting.  However, this great fowl does not experience any lack,
for its feet are almost solid like hoofs, and quite flat, and hence are
especially adapted for traveling across the sandy desert.

No bird has ever been found with more than four toes; and four seem to
be ample for all purposes.  A fifth toe for a bird would be as useless
as a fifth wheel on a wagon.  Quite a number of species have only three
toes, most of them among the walkers and waders, and none, I believe,
among the true perchers.  Take the plovers and sanderlings, for
example, which spend most of their time, when not on the wing, in
running about on the ground, especially along the seashore or the banks
of streams and lakes, and seldom, if ever, sit on a perch--in their
case a fourth toe would be worse than a superfluous appendage; it would
be an encumbrance, dragging along in the mud and mire.  In these
species it is the hind toe that is lacking, their three digits all
being in front, where they are of the greatest service.  There is
another class of birds that have hind toes, though very much reduced
because their owners do not perch, but scuttle about on the beach.
This class includes the little spotted sandpipers which you often see
running or flying along the shores of a river or lake.

Curious to tell, several species of woodpeckers are tridactyl--that is,
three-toed--and still more curious is the fact that in their case the
true hind toe is lacking, while the outer front toe is bent backward,
or "reversed," as it is called, and is thus made to do service for a
hind toe.  The other species of woodpeckers have four toes, two in
front and two behind, the outer one of the latter pair being a reversed
digit.  Why some of the woodpeckers should have four toes and others
only three is an unsolved enigma, and is especially puzzling in view of
the fact that the four-toed kinds do not seem to possess any advantage
over their cousins.  The tridactyl species are as expert climbers as
any members of the family, and are extremely hardy birds, too, some of
them dwelling the year round in cold northern climates, where the food
question must often be a serious one.

[Illustration: Spotted Sandpiper, or "Peet-weet"]

Here is still another conundrum for the bird student: Why do the
four-toed woodpeckers have two hind digits, despite the fact that they
always clamber upward when they take their promenades on the boles and
branches of the trees, whereas the agile little nuthatch, which glides
upward or downward, as the impulse moves him, has only one rear toe and
three in front, like the true perchers?  Nor is it less puzzling that
the cuckoos, which are perching birds, should have two toes in front
and two behind.  Then, there is the little brown creeper which never
perches and is forever creeping, creeping, upward, upward--save, of
course, when it takes to wing--and yet its toes are arranged in the
normal percher style, the hind digit having an especially long, curved
claw.  It is a mistake to suppose that all the problems of the bird
world have been solved.

Look at the different kinds of birds' feet and see how wisely they have
been planned for the various purposes to which they have been applied.
In order that a bird may use his feet with the greatest dexterity in
perching and flitting, his digits should be as free and movable as
possible; and so we find that the toes of the perchers are usually
cleft to the base, are long and slender, easily opened and closed, and
possess the power to grasp an object firmly.  The same is true of the
raptorial birds, or birds of prey, which are strong perchers and depend
largely for their food supply on clutching their victims while on the
wing.  In all these birds the hind toe is also well developed, and is
on the same plane as the anterior digits--a wise adaptation of means to
ends.

But there are other birds whose feet, as some one has said, are good
feet, but poor hands--that is, they are not intended for prehensile
purposes, only for walking and wading.  Therefore, in these birds the
hind toe is small, and more or less elevated above the plane of the
other digits, or, as has already been said, is wholly wanting.  The
feet of some of these birds are partly webbed, so that, if necessary,
they can change their mode of locomotion from running and wading to
swimming.  Birds whose feet are partly webbed are said to be
semipalmated.

This introduces us to that interesting group of birds whose toes are
connected throughout their entire length by a thin, membranous web.
Their feet are said to be palmated.  We can readily understand why they
are thus formed, for their webbed feet answer the purpose of oars to
propel them over the water.  Most of the swimmers have feet of this
kind.  Watch them glide like feathered craft over the smooth surface of
the stream or lake.

When a swimmer thrusts his foot forward, the toes naturally drop
together and partly close, presenting only a narrow front--almost an
edge--of resistance to the water; then, when he makes a backward
stroke, the toes spread far apart and, with the connecting membranes,
are converted into a broad, propelling oar.  Is it not a wonderfully
wise contrivance?

Most swimming birds have only the front toes webbed, but in a few
species, like the pelicans, even the hind toe is connected with its
fellows by means of such a membrane.  Nor must we forget those water
fowls which, instead of palmated feet, have what is called the lobate
foot, which means that the digits have broad lobes or flaps on their
sides.  While in such cases the toes are all distinct, the expanded
lobes serve almost, if not quite, as good a purpose for propulsion in
the water as do the webs.  The coot swims almost as well as the duck or
the goose, and at the same time his feet, with their disconnected toes,
are better adapted for paddling about amid the watergrass and dense
weeds than if they were webbed.

The birds of prey, such as hawks, owls, and eagles, have large, strong,
and sharply curved talons and powerful digits, and a sad use they make
of them in clutching small birds and animals.  The claws of the
woodpeckers and other climbing birds are stout and extremely acute,
just as they should be for clinging to the bark of trees.  In short,
the structure of a bird's foot, whatever may be the species of fowl,
furnishes most conclusive evidence of adaptation in the world of Nature.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR BIRD COMRADES***


******* This file should be named 26346-8.txt or 26346-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/3/4/26346



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
